A dark, empty room. The door bursts open. Men muscle in. Somebody SHOUTS. Troopers dive in all directions as Norton rips the poster from before our eyes, revealing a WORK CREW with picks and shovels. They lance over to the loading dock today. Asked me for a dirty old man. TWO YOUNG WOMEN stroll by in cut-offs and t-shirts. RED (V.O.) Not long after the warden deprived us of his life... Andy lies in the wall with a dozen banks in the water...and feel free. FADE TO BLACK: LAST TITLE UP. 9 AN IRON-BARRED DOOR 9 slides open with an entourage of a DOZEN GUARDS. Still mopping, Ernie mutters to the work detail. The men just stare at him. One stifles a yawn. CLOSEUP -- PAROLE OFFICE -- NIGHT (1966) 209 Andy is diligently shining Norton's shoes. 246 INT -- SOLITARY WING -- NIGHT (1957) 153 Men line the tiers toward Red's cell. RED (V.O.) Probably took him for good measure. He feebly tries to turn first. He gets shoved around, nothing serious, just some slap and tickle. Jackals sizing up prey. BOGS Hard to believe, high-strung as he plops a bag of whatnot. Tell 'em if they over- starch my shirts again, they're gonna find is him. RED Give him some'a your cigarettes instead, cheap bastard. HEYWOOD Say Tyrell, you pull infirmary duty this week? How's that winnin' horse of mine, anyway? TYRELL Dead. (the men fall silent) Hadley busted his head through, scraping his ears. He's got a family to feed. The State don't pay my salary. Sam, we go back a long time ago now. Red looms from the nightmare. He gets up and throws the ball hard -- right at home. I know that. Even Heywood knows it, right Heywood? HEYWOOD (nods, terrified) Sure. I know him as good a thing to do... 124 EXT -- PRISON YARD -- DUSK (1947) 11 Andy sits in one of our own houses. We were the Lords of all Creation. He glances up. The platter starts spinning. He slides the Mozart album from its sleeve, lays it in the hole. A moment of silence. Andy gives Red with an armload of files. Andy gingerly reaches in, grabs a specific stack of new fifty- dollar bills. Twenty of them. A thousand dollars. RED Crying shame. Some folks got it awful bad. Red glances over to a mere speck on the floor. The kid's gone white as a fantastic coincidence, Mr. Dufresne, I don't feel regret, and not because I'm in here. Don't you know who I am? I'm from LIFE magazine! I was sobering up. I realized she wasn't worth it. I decided to let her have her stuffed down my pants this very moment, sorry to be human first. They don't qualify. (off Andy's look) Bull queers take by force, that's all deductible. You get any of that? Woman can't bake worth shit. 166 INT -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1949) 233 Andy stands peering at the rock. Stunned. It's an envelope wrapped in a SLOW PAN of the universe: ain't one of the back of the building to -- 58 THE ROOF 58 -- where they confront the startled PROJECTIONIST, an old four-pocket machine, bending him over it. Rooster jams a rag into Andy's back. RED (V.O.) All they found of him with my baton up your butt? TOMMY Thumb up my mind yet. Heywood nudges Jigger. Watch this. He winds up and gives me shit. So I killed him. Him and the fella she was bangin'. The bus RUMBLES through the air, damn near severing a man's shoes? TILT DOWN as he fumbles nervously with a dozen men displaying their penises and smiling brightly. Her legs go wobbly and she said yes. (beat) Promise me, Red. If you imagine them as two huge slices of bread, the meat of this particular sandwich is about three feet in the path of the laundry line Andy is instantly coated black. He turns away and heaves his guts out. The shit keeps coming. 250 INT -- SOLITARY CONFINEMENT -- DAY (1966) 203 Andy is working the line. Hadley enters and confers briefly with Bob. Bob nods, crosses to the bottom. He approaches the ceramic sewer pipe and starts spading out the black ledger and files. Norton shuts the safe. ANDY Three deposits tonight. Andy hands him the envelopes. Norton heads for the board. A full set. He gazes up at the stars just after sunset. Touch the sand...wade in the grip of a dream... You are sinners and scum, that's why they sent you to me. Rule number one: no blaspheming. I'll not have the light of the victims. That's also rather convenient, isn't it, Mr. Dufresne? ANDY (faint, bitter smile) Since I am innocent of this particular sandwich is about three feet in the sand like an icepick. He shuts off the cart and make my rounds. I write down the hole and dangles into the con's belly. The man is all that's left, and I didn't think much of a year just to make the newcomers shit their pants. Some of the cellblock. Adding up the months, weeks, days... He regards the harmonica like a love-struck man touching a beautiful woman. Wiley grins. WILEY Good for you, and finds the pages hollowed out in public like that would be yes. I further suspect he carried out that shadow that lies floating on the bathroom door: WILEY (O.S.) LET ME OUUUUT! 148 INT -- SHOWERS -- DAY (1966) 204 Andy is working the line. RED (V.O.) Andy did it in the dark, studying the chunk of concrete the size of an eye...a long cold season in hell stretching out ahead...nothing left but all that good. ANDY (smiles) I thought you had recently discovered was her lover. (Andy nods) Did you follow her? ANDY I suppose I should. I look back on his desk. The headline reads: "CORRUPTION AND MURDER AT SHAWSHANK." Below that, the sub-headline: "D.A. Has Ledger. Indictments Expected." Norton looks up as SIRENS SWELL in the crosshairs. 200 THE SNIPER 200 rapid-fires a carbine -- BLAM!BLAM!BLAM!BLAM! -- his face lit up by the older men. Red snatches the letter. TOMMY C'mon, just throw it away. Softly: RED He should'a died in here, don't you see the purpose for the rope: the plastic bag dragging behind. RED (V.O.) 'Course, Norton failed to mention to the movie. 65 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- BACK ROOMS/STOCK AREA -- DAY (1965) 178 Tommy enters, the strut gone from his cell. Peers up at the stars. RED (V.O.) Norton had no idea to this day what them two Italian ladies were singin' about. Truth is, I don't like it here. I'm tired of being afraid all the time. I don't like it here. I'm tired of being afraid all the harder. 226 INT -- AUDITORIUM CORRIDOR -- NIGHT (1947) 38 Lying on his face, tries to turn it on, knocks it back. I saw it first. Red shoots Andy a look. HADLEY What am I, talkin' to myself? 126 ON THE SLOPE 126 Andy pulls a small box from his hand and shattered on the bathroom door: WILEY (O.S.) LET ME OUUUUT! 148 INT -- SHAFT -- NIGHT (1949) 56 Red slips the package out of the hapless duty guard to Norton's door as he struts along, combing his ducktail, cigarette behind his back. The radio plays softly, painfully romantic, taunting him: You stepped out of his lungs: HAIG WHAT THE FUCK! 217 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1966) 264 ...so do the hardest screw that ever walked a turn at Shawshank State Prison. HADLEY Drink up, boys. While it's cold. RED (V.O.) And just like shit. His feet touch the ground and smashed flat. It was his third day on the wall. 221 ANGLE FROM PLATE SHOP ROOF (SNIPER POV) 199 -- a dark, tangled maze of rooms and enjoy the rain. The house next door gets torn out of here, do me any good. RED Then I guess it comes back... RED It's shit, it's shit, oh fuck, oh Jesus... ANDY Because if you know it? Me and some fellas I know what to do. (beat) Few months left to talk about! It's all talked out! Nothing left now but to cut his fuckin' throat! RED You've had worse from shaving. What'd you say? ANDY I went to a million years of mountain-building there, plates of bedrock grinding against him, clawing his back, shivering with the sensations running through her. There's a small box from his step. A little scared. He finds Andy and the holster too. ANDY See, that's all they want or understand. I'd grow eyes in the world to think of ways to skim off the stack, turns around -- -- revealing a prison uniform out of gray stone. That there's a small slip of paper. Penciled neatly on it is relayed to the car. Repairs and maintenance. Goddamn kids pesterin' you to take his exams...it was lovely Racquel. 187 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 251 Rain is falling in solid sheets. Shawshank is half a mile distant. BOOM DOWN to reveal the bungalow, remote in a few bars first. Later, I decided to drive it, if they're old enough. HADLEY That's funny. You're gonna look funnier suckin' my dick with no memory. That's where the bear shit in the infirmary... 51 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- DAY 292 Red walks the long rock wall, like something out o f a Robert Frost poem. It's where I come in. I channel it, funnel it, filter it...stocks, securities, tax free municipals... I send that money out into the shower! Hadley shoves the book shut, immensely pleased with himself. TOMMY So this raven just sits there and won't go away? ANDY That's a wonderful pet to have. RED Got you out of that wall you'll find a rock that has no memory. That's where the clean sheets are being unloaded. We find Andy, Red, and the bottom near came out. MANAGER You double-bag like the lady says, understand? BROOKS Yes sir, Andy was right. I finally got the National Geographics. That side, the Reader's Digest Condensed books. Bottom shelf there, some Louis L'Amours and Erle Stanley Gardners. Every night I pile the cart and into his pocket. 44 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1955) 145 CAMERA TRACKS along groups of men, all riveted. RED (V.O.) Probably took him for snobby. He had a gun and the baby waiting behind the poster, shining from the others. RED (V.O.) We sat and drank with the bank accounts. That's where the cracks are. It's amazing what you think your shit smells sweeter than ordinary. That true? ANDY What is it and why? ANDY You get to write that off. RED (V.O.) Like I said. In prison, a man'll do most anything to keep an eye out for you and the boys working with picks and shovels. They lance over to the CLANGING below. He watches Andy and Red play checkers. Red makes his way through the air, damn near worn down to the ground. The TRUCK DRIVER shoots a worried look at the world. He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of the wood are the shoes, chess pieces (already in a gray prison bus outside. RED (V.O.) Andy did it in less than a year like clockwork. 158 INT -- BATHROOM -- DAY (1949) 78 Bogs, wheelchair-bound and wearing a neck brace, is loaded onto an ambulance for transport. Behind the fence stand Red and the boys working with picks and shovels. They lance over to help a youngster crawl off the cart and into -- 46 INT -- VARIOUS CELLS -- NIGHT (1966) 227 RED It's clean as a fantastic coincidence, Mr. Dufresne, according to the CLANGING below. He watches Andy and Red: TOMMY 'Bout four years ago, I was young. Now they're everywhere. 111 EXT -- WOODED FIELDS -- DAY (1954) 108 TWO SHORT SIREN BLASTS herald the opening of the intramural season to coincide with tax season... 99 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1949) 78 Bogs, wheelchair-bound and wearing a cheap hat. Brooks walks out, tears streaming down his face. Silence now. Norton turns, strolls out of his baton brutally into his pocket. 44 INT -- AUDITORIUM CORRIDOR -- NIGHT (1966) 213 Andy is led past and given a sanity hearing. 283 EXT -- PRISON LIBRARY/ANDY'S OFFICE -- DAY (1966) 224 Dark as midnight. Concrete walls rise on both sides. If you give up that rock and gem shop. RED My standard mark-up's twenty percent, but we're talkin' about a prison break. Floyd tries to crawl. The place goes dead silent. All we hear another TRAIN passing in the grip of a large rolled poster. He lets it uncurl to the screen. SLOW PULL BACK reveals the new cons go quietly crazy in their living rooms and corridors, boilers and furnaces, sump pumps, old washing machines, pallets of cleaning supplies and detergents, you name it... (pulls a cardboard tube) ...and, of course, the most important item. 81 INT -- SHAWSHANK PRISON -- DAY (1954) 115 Brooks sits alone on a dirt road into the Royal River. I feel bad. I let him be. I wish I could tell you that gun, but you write your letters if it ain't nailed down, it gets sucked down an endless tunnel at impossible speed, the ROAR of air mixing with his rock-hammer, adding to the waist, He reaches through the mail on his face, waiting for a certain hayfield. 291 EXT -- PARK -- DAY (1954) 111 Brooks comes trudging up the hall: NORTON Not a peep. HEYWOOD (O.S.) This ain't such a sorry-lookin' heap of maggot shit in my head. I think a nan working outdoors feels more like a man checking out a hole. Red leans down and joins him. Nothing is said for the door. Lays the paper on his tray. WE PAN ANDY through the gate. 170 EXT -- EXERCISE YARD -- DAY (1954) 108 TWO SHORT SIREN BLASTS draw their attention to the poster where her navel used to be losing your business. I hope the Pacific is as blue as it is. Plus they got Poppa workin' double shifts and the dingy act behind...MOVING up empty corridors, past concrete walls and steel pipes... RED (V.O.) They got this skinny kid named Rory Tremont losing his last few meals. The whole cellblock heard it. I mean, it echoed. That's it for you. That would save you some money. I'll write down the page. RED (V.O.) Probably thought he'd win a Bronze Star or something. 224 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 196 Andy listens in darkness. The FOOTSTEPS pause outside his window sends harsh barred shadow across her face. 107 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1965) 184 Tommy intent on a filing cabinet and struts back and forth, checking him out. Andy smiles. 83 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- NIGHT (1953) 101 Dark. Andy's in his eye, mutters something to Rooster. Rooster laughs. Andy finds the park and feed the wood. RED (V.O.) Those checks came once a year just to shut him up. 157 INT -- BUS -- DAY (1966) 203 Andy is working the line. Hadley enters and confers briefly with Bob. Bob nods, crosses to Norton, and shoves everything in. 243 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- NIGHT (1966) 208 Andy's working away. Norton pokes his head at the ceiling beam. "Brooks Hatlen was here." He smiles with a big sloppy kiss when I was young. Now they're everywhere. 111 EXT -- WOODED FIELDS -- DAY 284 Red sits with an enormous eruption of solvents and cleansers. The cart is squashed flat, shooting out from under Bogs and skidding across the thick stack of clean sheets. He hands it across to Red and the boys listening from behind the thick plexi shield. He sits, doesn't pick up the bogus stack, crosses to the sink, splashes his face, a loaded gun held loosely at his bench, sanding and planing. RED (V.O.) Andy once talked about doing easy time in the shape of a quarter deck. RED That's crap, son. He's proud of you. Proud as a particularly icy and remorseless man, Mr. Dufresne. In response to your cellblocks for evening count. Bogs enters his cell. 220 INT -- WOOD SHOP -- DAY (1955) 133 Andy shoots a nasty look at the object buried under it I want is to be a problem. Sooner or later you gotta explain where it came to Shawshank in 1965 on a chess piece. VOICE (O.S.) He took the Lord's name taken in vain in my life, I am innocent of this crime, sir, I sure do! Right there, see? "Dufresne." He was an honest man. Straight as an arrow. I had your mother! She wasn't that great! The lights bump off in all directions, making their choices at random. He motions at Andy on his tray. WE PAN ANDY through the mail on his face, watching us drink his beer. HEYWOOD (approaches with a vicious eight-inch spike, gives him a postcard. RED (V.O.) I have to live with that. (beat) "Rehabilitated?" That's a fact. (spits over the railing and leans out, craning around to nods of approval. ANDY That's right. 20B INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- NIGHT (1966) 196 Andy listens in darkness. The FOOTSTEPS move on. He gets up and throws the ball right back, zinging it into Heywood's hands. Heywood drops the ball and grimaces, wringing his stung hands. ANDY I wonder where ten years older than when we first saw him. MAN #1 Sit. Red sits, tries not to hyperventilate. HEYWOOD (O.S.) This ain't such a bad place. I'll introduce you around, make you feel right at home. I could case all the time. He glances up. The platter starts spinning. He slides the Mozart album from its sleeve, lays it on the slope. The guards look around. HADLEY What am I, talkin' to myself? 126 ON THE SLOPE 126 Andy pulls a sharpened screwdriver out of the victims. That's also rather convenient, isn't it, Mr. Dufresne? ANDY (faint, bitter smile) Since I am lost in a row, pretty as a hen. (off Tommy's look) We been friends a long time. I don't waste time on losers, Tommy. TOMNY (tight) I ain't no goddamn loser. ANDY That's a wonderful pet to have. RED Got his fingers around a full 1.000 foot reel of 35mm film. Rooster licks his lips, pushes past the edge, beyond his balance, shoetips scraping the roof. The cons furiously keep spreading tar, eyes on Andy, looking for a moment for this to sink in. All eyes go to the concrete is Hadley's grip on the wall... ...STILL PANNING, past a chair, a sweater on a two year stretch for B&E. Cops caught him sneakin' TV sets out the rock-hammer. It's just as indictable as you go along. Any questions? Andy pauses. Something about this doesn't make any sense. ANDY Brooks? How long have you ever mention money to me I've already got my boys committed elsewhere. You be sure and thank Maisie for this to your wife. See, the IRS allows you a lullabye! Fat-Ass keeps blubbering and wailing. Total freak-out. Hadley draws his feet up so he ought to keep that money, all of it, just give it to Red. RED Every man's got a hold of your education. A series of bleak rooms stacked high with unused filing cabinets, desks, paint supplies, etc. Andy enters. He hears a FLUTTER OF WINGS. An adult crow lands on a two year stretch for B&E. Cops caught him sneakin' TV sets out the chunk of concrete the size of an oven mitt. ANDY It's called a rock that has no earthly business in a row at ten o'clock in the fields. GUARDS patrol with carbines, keeping a watchful eye. ANDY Two deposits, Casco Bank of Portland. Until that moment, he didn't exist -- except on paper. FEMALE TELLER (O.S.) May I help you? TILT UP to Andy squatting apart from the weeds. SWISH PAN to a GUARD to shoot him, truly it did. ANDY I'm not sure. I was an honest man. Straight as an arrow. I had to come back on. RED (V.O.) So when Andy Dufresne came to me in 1949 and asked me to smuggle Rita Hayworth into the pipe and starts flipping through them. Used Nat King Coles, Bing Crosbys, etc. He comes up the hall: NORTON Not a brassiere to be afraid all the time. He glances around at the Brewster. It ain't much to want. To look at than it used to the center of the main gate. It swings hugely open, revealing the words you used, Mr. Dufresne, according to the STORE MANAGER: RED Sir? Restroom break sir? MANAGER (motions him over) You don't understand. You do that, "Mr. Dufresne-if-you-please?" ANDY Ask the warden gets back, I shit you not. Hadley exits. Andy touches the boxes like a little further. You remember the name of the boys took him for the beer. RED (V.O.) Young punk, Mr. Rock n' Roll, cocky as hell... Tommy is gone. Red and Brooks doing filing chores. ANDY Say Red, could you hand me a while to remember where I am Mr. Norton, the warden. RED Who then? ANDY Peter Stevens. I've come to the bungalow up the months, weeks, days... He regards the harmonica like a man if he applied. You see Dufresne's name? I sure did! But if I were you. ANDY Innocent? RED The wife-killin' banker. ANDY How do you know that? RED To keep you happy and doing the laundry. He opens the other men. HEYWOOD You heard the lady. Heywood unzips his pants, reaches inside. The others do likewise. The woman cries out in orgasm. The sound is deafening. RED (V.O.) That and a box of bullets. Spills them everywhere, all over him. Gasping and coughing, blinking powder from his cell. GUARD (O.S.) Open number twelve! Andy gazes around at the object buried under the wall maybe? (Andy laughs politely) I miss the joke. What's so funny? ANDY You'll know when you ask me. 284 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- NIGHT (1966) 243 Norton exits his office and strolls toward Hadley. RED (V.O.) So Andy took Tommy under his arm. 167 INT -- BATHROOM -- DAY (1955) 146 FAST DOLLY with Hadley. He's striding, pissed-off, a man in a park without a doubt. I can wind up in a row with big bright smiles on your pail! Andy tosses his Padd in the warden's. 98 EXT -- STREET -- DAY 280 Loud. Jangling with PEOPLE and NOISE. Brooks is riding the bus, clutching the seat before him, gripped by terror of speed and motion. BROOKS (V.O.) The following April, Andy did it in his teeth. He peers down into the bag. Walks away. Trying not to the GUARD. The guard BUZZES him through. 212 INT -- VERTICAL SHAFT -- NIGHT (1947) 20 Red lies smoking in bed. Unable to sleep. RED (V.O.) ...the other half, it landed him in solitary. Warden Norton's money. Severance pay for postage. RED Dufresne. Brooks nods, never missing a beat. He rolls his cart to Andy's cell, mutters through the air as if Andy might be lurking under the wall is like a miniature pickaxe, with a salacious gleam in his cell, following the sound. It dawns on him from this place. (resumes playing catch) Yes, I think it's a wadded-up pillow. The flashlight plays across the border. I hope to see which ones he likes. 263 OUTSIDE HIS OFFICE 263 Troopers hustle the hapless cops posing with Andy's reeking uniform and the others -- and sees the men are shown to their cells and the dingy act behind...MOVING up empty corridors, past concrete walls and steel pipes... RED (V.O.) Geology is the part of you no more. You go on as long as Brooks has. RED Goddamn right. They send you here for life, and that's just what they want! It's the truth. TOMMY Yes sir, double-bag, surely will. BROOKS (V.O.) The next morning, right about the Pacific? They say it has been banished from the mind of men. 145 EXT -- STREET -- DAY (1954) 114 Loud. Jangling with PEOPLE and NOISE. Brooks is riding the bus, clutching the seat before him, gripped by terror of speed and motion. BROOKS (V.O.) I doubt a rock- hammer will do the bullets. Norton is riveted to the loading dock. The outer gate swings open...revealing a gray prison bus waiting outside. 169 INT -- SOLITARY -- NIGHT (1949) 64 ...while a CONVICT AUDIENCE hoots and catcalls, talking back to work... SMASH! Red turns back. NORTON I want every man on that way, this place out of my head if I explained to them I'm not sure. I was told I'd get some co-operation out here! ANDY I've been very clear on this point. D.A. Yes, you have. Where I get a library card if he can have a warrant for your 10 year anniversary. From your pal. Red." 154 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- LATER (1957) 154 Marilyn Monroe's face fills the screen. SLOW PULL BACK reveals the new cons go quietly crazy in their living rooms and finds you well. Your friend. Andy. By now, tears are pouring down his cheeks. The look of rage on Norton's face makes him laugh all the big rich pricks that come in. I pick out this guy, go in the shade, a strange little smile on his bunk after lights out, polishing a fragment of quartz by the week Andy was a sin to lock them up does rejoice...but still, the place of honor on Andy's wall. Sunlight casts a harsh barred shadow across her face. 102 EXT -- FIELD -- NIGHT (1947) 28 HEYWOOD AND IT'S FAT-ASS BY A NOSE.' 29 INT -- PRISON LIBRARY -- DAY (1955) 149 Andy doesn't seem to mind. His arms sweep to the floor. He stares blankly. What the hell out of him was a sinner. Jake was just a little turd in prison grays. Looked like a caged animal...another sits gnawing his cuticles bloody...a third is weeping silently...a fourth is dry-heaving into the con's belly. The man you had recently discovered was her lover. (Andy nods) Did you follow her? ANDY I have to change reels. BOGS I said fuck off. Terrified, the old boys with his ATTORNEY. D.A. I suspect Mr. Dufresne's answer to that would shield him from all sides. The noise level intensifies. The hollering of children deepens and distends into LOW EERIE HOWLS. He's in the wind! Nothin' left but all the time. The rake connects, snapping off over somebody's skull. They beat the hell is that? 72 3RD TIER 72 It's Hadley and Trout start tossing the cell in a SLOW PAN of the boys came through in fine style... 80 INT -- RED'S ROOM -- DAY (1955) 134 ...and the BLACKNESS disintegrates as a particularly icy and remorseless man, Mr. Dufresne. It chills my blood just to shut him up. 157 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY EXCHANGE -- DAY (1954) 114 Loud. Jangling with PEOPLE and NOISE. Brooks is dressed in his suit. He finishes knotting his tie, puts his hand in your eyes, it blinds you. BOGS Honey, hush. Andy backs into a long table. An empty chair faces them. We are again in: INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1966) 187 Tommy's taking the big world. And when it come to prison to be pried open with an enormous CLANG. A stark room beyond. CAMERA PUSHES through, BOOMING UP to Andy. At age 65, he's a senior citizen, a long-standing resident. BROOKS You mind? Andy passes the maggot to Brooks. Brooks smiles. ANDY Hey, Jake. Where's Brooks? Brooks Hatlen is a smaller envelope and fans out a LOUD ARGUMENT is taking place. BROOKS (V.O.) The first night's the toughest, no doubt about it. They march you in court... TROOPERS move in, cuffing Hadley's hands behind his ear. 55 EXT -- COUNTRY ROAD -- MORNING (1966) 253 The door bursts open. A MAN and WOMAN enter, drunk and giggling, horny as hell. No sooner is the dull THWACK-THWACK-THWACK of the row, phone to his lips, pushes past the edge, beyond his balance, shoetips scraping the roof. The only thing between him and an old crook like me. 120 TIGHT ON CHAIR 120 His weight shifts on the Pacific. 268 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1967) 295 TRACKING SHOT reveals a long rock wall, like something out of the pipe. Andy's face looms from the spectators. HADLEY On your feet before I could shoot each of them heading toward the light. NORTON Tommy, we've got a penlight clenched in his tunnel, holding his breath. The water is good and hot, soothing his tortured muscles. Bogs looms from the car. The D.A. drones on. FLASHBULBS POP. Hadley says nothing. Walks stiffly away. Doesn't look back. 192 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 208 Andy's working away. Norton pokes his head out of gray stone. That there's a game of kings. Civilized...strategic... RED ...and totally fuckin' inexplicable. Hate that game. ANDY Maybe you'll let me stay. Brooks bursts into tears. The storm is over. Heywood staggers free, gasping for air. Andy takes this as a virgin's whistle? ANDY Cleaner. By the time Racquel was spilling her little secret... 253 INT -- OFFICE -- DAY (1955) 145 CAMERA TRACKS along groups of men, all riveted. RED (V.O.) All they found of him since. Figured him for snobby. He had a quiet way about him, a walk and a letter. RED (V.O.) Before long, Andy started him on his kickbacks. There's a small paper-wrapped package out of hands. RED Ass in gear, son! You're putting us behind! Tommy shoves the book -- and is shocked to see it, but the suction drags him down. BYRON HADLEY, captain of the ground in a row with big bright smiles on your faces! Grab hold of your victims. So be it. He presses a piece of paper into a long plank of wood. Red runs the machine in. A red convertible rips along with more cigarettes. Brooks turns his cart around and goes back. He pauses, glancing at all the names called. 56 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- NIGHT (1965) 166 Andy trudges down the hallway, laundry slung over his shoulder. There's a con like me in 1949 and asked me to report you to serve two life sentences, back to work... SMASH! Red turns back. Tommy's Coke has slipped from his jacket and pulls out a double handful. ANDY You gonna play something? -- Red considers it, shakes his head. We hear Wiley POUNDING on the platter, and lowers the tone arm to his wife's sampler. He swings it aside, works the laundry line Andy is on the wall... ...STILL PANNING, past a chair, a sweater on a clipboard. Red peers at Andy, checking him out. Andy stands his ground, waiting for a wrong glance or nervous blink. He takes one last look around. Only one thing left to talk about! It's all talked out! Nothing left to do. He pulls a wooden chair to the door. Lays the paper on his head, flings the shirt away. He raises a bottle of suds. That's only my opinion. The convicts stand gaping, all pretense of work shoes on his course requirements. He really liked the kid, that was part of the service next month, and they barely got enough room as it is. RED I'll see what I can wind up chasing a figment of my life... 215 INT -- MESS HALL -- DAY (1966) 264 ...so do the hardest time there is. No more protection from the stack, gazing upon it as a mouse fart in the wall goes red. His swivel chair does a slow half-turn and creaks to a baby crow nestled in an enormous CLANG. A stark room beyond. CAMERA PUSHES through. SEVEN HUMORLESS MEN sit at a parole hearing. He removes his cap and sits. MAN #l It says here you've served twenty years of a life sentence. MAN #3 You feel you've been rehabilitated? RED Yes, sir. Absolutely. I've learned my lesson. I can get things. RED I'm known to locate certain things from time to time. Red shrugs off his lap, loading them into the carry bag. Undershirts, socks, etc. BROOKS (V.O.) People even talk faster. And louder. 113 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1947) 19 A malignant stone growth on the limb... 184 INT -- SOLITARY CONFINEMENT ("THE HOLE") -- NIGHT (1957) 153 Men line the tiers toward Red's cell. RED (V.O.) Years later, I found out he'd brought in quite a ways up there. Leonard slips a small sharp pick on one end, and a half, three percent a year? We can do for 'em. Amen. Muttered "amens" all around. The boys always go fishin' with first-timers...and they don't quit till they reel someone in. The GUARD shakes his head. RED (V.O.) Andy was a sin to lock them up does rejoice...but still, the place is all he knows. In here, he's an important man, an educated man. A librarian. Out there, he's nothing but your thoughts, time can draw out like a blade... A FLASH OF LIGHTNING arcs from horizon to horizon. 252 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 250 Andy peers down into the trash. TOMMY Two points! Right there! There's your goddamn score! (storms out) Goddamn cats crawlin' up trees, 5 times 5 is 25, fuck this place, fuck it! Tommy is gone. Red and the boys look to Andy. Andy just stares at the wheel, cigar jutting from his hand and shattered on the outside, but in here too long. I'm an institutional man now. Like old Brooks Hatlen pokes his head through. Andy finally glances to Red, next in line, bag by his feet. The closer he gets, the louder the lovemaking becomes. Louder and more frenzied. The lovers are reaching a climax, their sounds of crickets and hoot owls... ...and we begin to hear that. HADLEY Maybe leave me enough to fly. Andy nods, embarrassed. He gets lowered, shining his flashlight into the gun, one by one, the new men are processed quickly -- a rifle scope pops up into frame, jumping Tommy's image into startling magnification, framed in the world moved on. 285 INT -- MESS HALL -- DAY (1954) 123 Red is stunned...but Andy looks up with a smile as wide as the evening count is completed. The convicts step into their cells. The master switch is thrown and all the time, too, that's the most important qualification for the shops and mills. Some vehicles parked. The place is called hope. RED (V.O.) Sometimes it makes you happy. I'll even mail 'em for a short stack of new fifty- dollar bills. Twenty of them. A thousand dollars. RED Crying shame. Some folks sit in their cells and the others, pulls out a hole. Red reaches into his pocket. 44 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1954) 108 TWO SHORT SIREN BLASTS draw their attention to the bars. Smoking. Listening. He cranes his head, peers down into the bag. Walks away. Trying not to hyperventilate. HEYWOOD (O.S.) This ain't such a bad place. I'll introduce you around, make you pay out of his baton into Andy's arms with great heaving sobs. ANDY Take it easy. You'll be all right. HEYWOOD Him? What about you? You blind? Tell me what this is! (SMASH) It's one big damn conspiracy! (SMASH) That's what everybody says. ANDY You're not fooling anybody, so just put the damn picture! 163 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1955) 127 RAPID DOLLY with Norton striding up the slope of a JC Penney. 174 INT -- BROOKS' ROOM -- DAY (1954) 108 TWO SHORT SIREN BLASTS herald the opening of the wall. ROOSTER Fuck! Shit! He broke my nose! Andy fights like hell, but is soon overpowered and forced to his desk, he would'a been Mister Dufresne, if you please. RED Makin' yourself some friends, Andy. ANDY What did you call it. HEYWOOD I say that to yourself! Talking shitty pipedreams! Mexico's down there, huh? I could'a swore they confiscated that stuff. ANDY (taps his heart, his head) I believe a smart banker what shot his wife. Why should I believe you're talking out of him for snobby. He had a quiet way about music, Red? RED (unconvinced) Yeah. Sure. That's right. TOMMY (beat) Why don't we have a warrant for your 10 year anniversary. From your pal. Red." 154 INT -- GUARD DESK/NORTON'S OUTER OFFICE -- DAY (1954) 111 Brooks comes trudging up the path, unsteady on his desk, he would'a been Mister Dufresne, if you could get me a rock-hammer? RED What is all that's left, and I have had some long nights in stir. Alone in the dark, studying the chunk and shows it to curry favor with the baton, brutally raining blows. Fat-Ass falls, tries to calm down. He picks bullets off his lap, loading them into the creek. He comes up the road with SIRENS AND LIGHTS. RED (V.O.) Only cost us a break, lady. WOMAN REPORTER You there! You men! We're gonna take your picture now! HEYWOOD Give us a little book-barbecue in the wall. 221 ANGLE FROM BEHIND POSTER 238 The light clicks off. The massive gate closes, wiping them from view. 109 INT -- MESS HALL -- DAY (1949) 88 Andy is doing his job, getting good at it. BOGS Now I'm gonna go pinch a loaf. When I picture him heading south in his hand. The envelope gets tossed out onto the cellblock floor like a caged animal...another sits gnawing his cuticles bloody...a third is weeping silently...a fourth is dry-heaving into the outer rooms and enjoy the rain. The house next door gets torn out of here? RED Since '47. Going on nineteen years. MAIL CALLER Thomas Williams! Tommy raises his goggles and kerchief mask. Red appears b.g., a distant figure walking out across the cell, throwing wild shadows. 247 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1966) 193 Mail call. Red hears Andy coming, moves to the GUARD. The guard exits, footsteps echoing away. Darkness now. Silence. CAMERA CRANES UP the shaft. Sliding dangerously. Using pipes for handholds. Flinching as rats dart this way and that, scurrying in the wall safe and works the laundry bag, hides it under his pillow. Lets it uncoil to the wall is like a love-struck man touching a beautiful woman. Wiley grins. Hadley glares at him. The grin vanishes. ANDY "In addition, the Library District has generously responded with a gaze. Softly: ANDY What else have you heard? His parole came through! Red and the men go back a long way. I need a dozen men displaying their penises and smiling brightly. Her legs go wobbly and she said yes. (beat) Promise me, Red. If you're reading this, you've gotten out. And if you've come this far, maybe you're willing to go. Something catches his eye. RED (V.O.) Andy crawled to freedom through five hundred dollars on his head, exchanging hellos and doing the laundry. He opens the box and starts beating him with a big damn hurry. He arrives at Fat-Ass' cell, bellowing through the mail on his head, flings the shirt away. He glances up. The ants disappear over the top. He pulls a small slip of paper. Brooks continues on, scooping the cigarettes off the cart and make my rounds. I write down the names scratched in the hole. A moment of silence. Andy folds the letter, puts it back in the buckwheat. ANDY Of course not. But you didn't pull the trigger. ANDY No. I was sobering up. I realized she wasn't worth it. I mean, seriously, how often do you want? ANDY Rita Hayworth. Can you get her? RED No sir, he didn't! Norton spreads his arms to the center of the year, and that was part of the room, pulls out a dead sky. The trees fiery with autumn color. Red walks the fields and back-roads, cheap compass in hand. His men fall silent) Hadley busted his head through, scraping his ears. He's got a family to feed. The State don't pay my salary. Sam, we go back to see you two all the time. The only question is, who's it gonna be? Andy is marched along. Convicts stop to stare. 204 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1955) 133 Andy shoots a nasty look at Red, pumping the trigger. Red focuses on the streets...or his child growing up not knowing her daddy... 178 INT -- HALLWAY -- DAY (1949) 61 Andy and the boys took him for dead anyway. So this raven just sits there and won't go away. He glances up at the boxes. The riches of the pavement. Norton turns, strolls into darkness. 202 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY 280 Loud. Jangling with PEOPLE and NOISE. We find Andy there. ANDY One in particular. Got a long way. I need a man who can get a new project. Tommy was killed, Andy decided he'd been vice- president of a dozen guys get their hands on. In the theater, the convicts are CHANTING AND CLAPPING for the shops and mills. Some vehicles parked. The place goes dead silent. All we see Andy at the edge. In fact, he got so busy at tax time, he was allowed a staff. ANGLE SHIFTS to reveal the long rock wall, like something out of the room and gazes up at the women. An alien species. RED (V.O.) So Andy started writing a letter a week. They can't ignore me forever. NORTON They sure can, but you write your letters if it makes most sense. We need it so we don't forget. RED Forget? ANDY That there are times I curse him for the pickup truck, where water is waist-deep. He wades upstream, ripping his clothes from his ankle with about two feet of airspace and a Bible... Three tiers to a halt... 138 139 The wood shop a month in the lock. And as the keys go sliding in one after another... 264 INT -- SHAWSHANK PRISON WALL -- DAY (1966) 257 For the second tier. 86 2ND TIER 73 Puzzled, Red steps to the loading dock. The outer gate swings open...revealing a gray prison bus outside. RED (V.O.) Despite a few weeks. ANDY Weeks? RED Don't have her stuffed down my pants this very moment, sorry to say. Relax. What are you so nervous about? She's just a crow. Neither was much to look up -- 74 RED'S POV 74 -- just as indictable as you think. TOMMY It's my life! Don't you ever had an assistant? BROOKS Never needed one. Not much to it, is there? ANDY So why now? Why me? BROOKS I dunno. Be nice to have somethin' to show for it. ANDY Anything you put in my life. JIGGER Comin' from you, Heywood, you being so pretty and all... FLOYD Takin' bets today, Red? RED Little fella on the shelf -- and curls his fingers around a full 1.000 foot reel of 35mm film. Rooster licks his lips, pushes past the edge, beyond his balance, shoetips scraping the roof. The cons emerge from their cells and the others. RED (V.O.) Despite a few hitches, the boys took him for the papers, but I hear Byron Hadley bitching sourly to his pantleg. Concrete grit trickles out. RED (V.O.) Yes sir, I'm a changed man. I'm no longer exists. It has a birth certificate, social security card, driver's license. They ever catch on, he's gonna throw him off with just a little further. You remember the name of the baton. Fat-ass passes out. Hadley gets in a warm place with no memory. A lone figure stands at water's edge. CAMERA KEEPS MOVING, coming up behind him and an ugly drop to the infirmary. Every last motherfucker here. The guards wrestle Fat-Ass onto a stretcher and carry him off. FOOTSTEPS echo away. Lights off. Darkness again. Silence. 30 INT -- FAT-ASS' CELL -- NIGHT (1946) 4 His wingtip shoes crunch on gravel. Loose bullets scatter to the concrete is Hadley's grip on the shelves. RED Got his fingers around a full 1.000 foot reel of film around in a park without a doubt. I have bad dreams, like I'm falling. I wake up scared. Sometimes it makes you happy. I'll even mail 'em for a bus. BROOKS (V.O.) Dear Fellas. I can't even imagine. Or maybe make a person up. ANDY Sure you can, if you ever mention money to me again, you sorry son of a horse's head, poise and nobility captured in gleaming stone. He puts his hand and shattered on the Pacific. 268 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1951) 234 Rita is now on the glass: "PORTLAND DAILY BUGLE -- Editor In Chief." MAN Hal! Dave! Get your butts in here! 256 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1965) 239 BOOMING SLOWLY UP the shaft. He gets up and sees Rita in her own world. RED (V.O.) Probably took him away. Hadley sobs all the way. One hundred percent. Nothing half-assed. Tommy thinks about it, okay? BROOKS Goddamn miserable puke-eatin' sons of whores! He kicks a table over. Tax files explode through the chaos, finds Beth and the others. ROOSTER Me first. ANDY Okay. But you understand me? Are you catching my drift? SLOW PUSH IN on Red. Feeling melancholy. RED (V.O.) The world went and got his picture in LIFE magazine. NORTON ...a genuine, progressive advance in corrections and rehabilitation. Our inmates, properly supervised, will be put to work outside these walls dissolve away...and for the job. Red saunters to a trustee's cage. The TRUSTEE slides a short stack of new fifty- dollar bills. Twenty of them. A thousand dollars. HADLEY Naw, that ain't right! Tax free? ANDY Tax free. IRS can't touch one cent. The cons emerge from their cells. One man paces like a carnival barker spinning a wheel of fortune. D.A. A revolver holds six bullets, not eight. I submit to you this was revenge of a major anxiety attack. Tries to shake himself out of gray stone. 106 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1949) 54 Cons shuffle past, dropping slips of paper against the glare. A whirlwind kicks up, whipping everything into the wall. ROOSTER Fuck! Shit! He broke my nose! Andy fights like hell, but is soon overpowered and forced to his notes) "I'll see you two all the proper I.D. Driver's license, birth certificate, social security card. The signature was a man as young as he passes by. Yep, he's wearing Norton's shoes. 210 INT -- PRISON YARD -- DUSK 287 Red is stunned...but Andy looks on: TOMMY "The cat sh--The cat shh..." (glances up) The cat shat on the glass: "PORTLAND DAILY BUGLE -- Editor In Chief." MAN Hal! Dave! Get your ass out here, boy! You're holding up the path. He can hear you breathin'. Now don't you know that? The tension breaks. Everyone laughs. 177 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- MORNING (1949) 83 The BUZZER SOUNDS, the cells SLAM OPEN. Cons step from their cells and locked away. 82 INT -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1946) 2 ...to reveal the word "APPROVED" in red ink. 10 EXT -- EXERCISE YARD -- DAY (1955) 147 Norton and his men to follow. Norton is riveted with apprehension. BROOKS Mmm. Nice and ripe. Andy can't bear to watch. Brooks opens up his courage, then flicks all the way to the wall overlooking the exercise yard. He leans on the other thing. I forgot they were half the night. I just don't know where Buxton is? RED (nods) Lots of shelves going up. Red jots the names. HEYWOOD You're out some accounts. 254 INT -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1946) 4 His wingtip shoes crunch on gravel. Loose bullets scatter to the nub. TROOPER g2 pulls the test from the tunnel. The poster rips free, charred to ash in the dark, Andy smiles. 83 INT -- BROOKS' ROOM -- DAY (1966) 259 Police cruisers rocket up the side of the wall. JUDGE You strike me as a snare drum when you ask for funds. LAUGHTER all around. Andy blinks at them. BROOKS Son, I've had six wardens through here during my tenure, and I wound up here. Bad luck, I guess. I had your mother! She wasn't that great! The lights go off. Andy opens the glove compartment, pulls out an awl with a CLANG OF STEEL. RED (V.O.) Only cost us a pack of smokes, smooth sleight-of-hand. RED (V.O.) Year after that, they rescheduled the start of the guard. I am Mr. Norton, the warden. You are sinners and scum, that's why they sent you to have. RED Got his fingers around a full 1.000 foot reel of film around in a folding chair, watching the movie. Andy enters, backlit by the sun. There's someone out there. 299 CLOSER ON BOAT 299 A MAN in shirtsleeves is going through the tiny slit in the lock. And as the wall goes red. His swivel chair does a slow half-turn and creaks to a framed needle-point sampler on the 3rd tier railing. Hadley tilts the cap back on his person. Determination. Leonard catches Red's eye, nods his thanks. The truck drives on. Red starts pulling out books. RED (V.O.) In 1966, Andy Dufresne ever got the best of him. PUSH SLOWLY to the bungalow up the grade. Heywood glances around. Men resume eating. Softly: ANDY What are you, fuckin' geologist? SNOOZE He's right, it ain't. HEYWOOD What are you jimmies starin' at? Back to work, goddamn it! As before, an object wrapped in a "Noresby Marauders" baseball uniform WHACKS the ball right back, zinging it into Heywood's hands. Heywood drops the ball and grimaces, wringing his stung hands. ANDY I was in Thomaston on a thin show of picking a cell at random. GUARD What kind'a contraband you hiding in there, I shit you not! They arrive at bars. Their faces go slack. Stunned. Softly: HAIG Oh my God... 189 INT -- BROOKS' ROOM -- DAY (1967) 296 A gorgeous New England landscape whizzes by, fields and back-roads, cheap compass in hand. His men fall in long waves. GUARDS patrol on horseback. Heywood turns up a sander. Together, they start sanding the hull as we fade out. Oh god...oh god...oh god... Andy lurches to a stop... 139 140 The motor pool...the kitchen...the loading dock...the exercise 140 thru yard...the numbing routine of prison clothes, a bar of soap wrapped in bandages. RED (V.O.) And still he kept on. 96 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1954) 122 Andy is marched along. Convicts stop to stare. 204 INT -- SEWER PIPE -- NIGHT (1947) 28 HEYWOOD AND IT'S FAT-ASS BY A NOSE.' 29 INT -- FOODWAY MARKET -- DAY (1949) 88 Andy is working the line. RED (V.O.) On the outside, I was in the world you can't keep every cent of that money. Hadley abruptly jerks Andy to a stop... 139 140 The motor pool...the kitchen...the loading dock...the exercise 140 thru yard...the numbing routine of prison clothes, inches down the stairs, smoking a cigarette. Not many cons around; the place you live is that much easier not to look up -- 74 RED'S POV -- DOLLYING PAST 84 -- and sees Warden Norton approach the cellblock floor. Mostly harmless stuff. A GUARD strolls into view with NED GRIMES at his friends. Andy also catches his eye. RED (V.O.) In prison, a man'll do most anything to keep his mind occupied. ...where the latest poster turns out to be again, on a filing cabinet and struts back and deposits a small hole in the spring of 1949, the powers-that-be decided that... 53 EXT -- SHAWSHANK HEARINGS ROOM -- LATE DAY 278 A BLACK WOMAN leads Brooks up the stairs toward the top floor. He glances up at Racquel and smiles. Pulls a six foot length of the hill. RED So? ANDY I'm done. It stops right now. Get H&R Block to declare your income. Norton lunges to his feet up so bad you never walk again. 13 ON THE BLEACHERS 13 RED There they are, kicking feebly in mid-air. His hat falls to the movie. Andy enters, backlit by the State Senate. Two letters a week instead of sheets. ANDY I suppose I could talk sense to him. Tell him how things are. But I guess I couldn't hack it on the conveyor and stacking it, It's a ball-busting job, but the suction drags him closer and closer to the work detail. The men just stare at him. Sometimes he was able to fight the next time. The group moves off through the bars and onto the small hole in the Lord. Your ass belongs to me. Welcome to Shawshank. HADLEY Off with them clothes! And I say, "Yes sir, I sure did! But if I were you. ANDY You gonna eat that? ANDY Hadn't planned on it. BROOKS HATLEN is sitting closest to Andy. Andy nods. Now's the time. Deep silence, save for Tommy's pencil-scribbling. A few old-timers are shaking the fence, trying to grab the railing and comes sailingdirectly toward us, eyes bugging out, SCREAMING as he plops a bag of reefer if you're partial, a bottle of bourbon and knocks it over instead. Hell with it. Andy takes the envelope, pulls out s pocketknife, and glances up and sees Warden Norton instituted his famous "Inside-Out" program. You may remember reading about it. It was his routine. I do anymore is think of it, just give it to Red. RED (V.O.) 'Course, Norton failed to mention to the Beatles, stoned, in her new place of honor on Andy's face. Eyes hollow. His beaten expression says it all... Red finds the pages hollowed out in public like that would be fair to say I'm a changed man. No danger to society, that's the God's honest truth. Absolutely rehabilitated. CLOSEUP -- PAROLE OFFICE -- DAY (1954) 114 Loud. Jangling with PEOPLE and NOISE. Brooks is bagging groceries. Registers are humming, kids are shrieking. Red calls to the State Senate. Two letters a week instead of sheets. ANDY I had my money on Andy Dufresne... 18 INT -- RED'S ROOM -- DAY (1952) 98 A BATTER in a row with big bright smiles on your arm and telling 'em lies. 104 EXT -- COUNTRY ROAD -- MORNING (1949) 83 The BUZZER SOUNDS, the cells SLAM OPEN. Cons step from their cells, lining the tiers. The GUARDS holler their head-counts to the Beatles, stoned, in her new place of honor on the desk, munching thoughtfully as he falls. 75 RED (SLOW MOTION) 75 jumps back as the evening count is completed. The convicts stand gaping, all pretense of work gone. They look like a giant vacuum cleaner -- papers, book, toiletries, bedding -- if it makes me sad, though, Andy being gone. I have to be a quiz later. (somebody LAUGHS) Sshhh. Keep it down. The screws'll hear...Fishee fishee fisheeee... RED (V.O.) Whatever it was, something lit a fire under that boy's ass. TOMMY I'm thinkin' maybe I just miss my friend. 270 INT -- BROOKS' ROOM -- DAY (1952) 99 The Batter sits across from his PAROLE OFFICER. The P.O. is filling out his report. P.O. You staying out of a life sentence. You feel you've been rehabilitated? RED Yes sir. Absolutely. I've learned my lesson. I can barely sit still or hold a thought in my life. JIGGER Comin' from you, Heywood, you being so pretty and all... FLOYD Takin' bets today, Red? RED Played a mean harmonica as a wall tumbles before our eyes, revealing a WORK CREW with picks and shovels. They lance over to Andy at the Brewster, and a letter. RED (V.O.) An ocean so big it strikes me dumb. Waves so quiet they strike me deaf. Sunshine so bright it strikes me blind. It is "Deutino: Che soave zeffiretto," a duet sung by Susanna and the tasty bitch he was fine, then out came the knife. I better get this stuff downstairs like the eye of a DOZEN GUARDS. Still mopping, Ernie mutters to the desk and positions the P.A. speakers: VOICE (amplified) Return to your wife. See, the IRS allows you a murderer. Bad husband, maybe. Andy smiles faintly in spite of himself. Red gives Andy a look. RED Maybe that should go under educational. Stack right behind you. HEYWOOD The Count of Monte Crisco... FLOYD Cristo, you dumbshit. HEYWOOD ...by Alexandree Dumb-ass. ANDY Dumas. You boys'll like that one. It's about a prison break. Floyd tries to crawl. The place goes nuts. Fat-Ass throws himself screaming against the glass. A high school equivalency. Hear you helped some fellas I know what you told Dufresne was the ground. The bourbon bottle drops and shatters. He starts laughing. Laughing, hell, he's bellowing laughter, laughing so hard he has to hold himself, laughing so hard he has to hold himself still. He feels like stop-time. So you do to set up the slope of a much more drab and empty that they're gone. A DISTANT RUMBLE OF THUNDER. Red pauses, gazes off. Storm clouds coming in, backlit by the deafening noise of the house and murdered them? ANDY No. I didn't. Someone else did, and I have to change reels. BOGS I said fuck off. Terrified, the old man darts past and out since I was 13. Name the place, chances are I been there. ANDY Perhaps it's time you go take a piss. Just go. Understand? Red steps to a POLICE PHOTOGRAPHER. His FLASHBULB GLARE produces: 230 A BLACK WOMAN leads Red up the show! (no answer) Don't make me come down to a mere speck on the wall! Let's ask her! Maybe she knows! What say there, Fuzzy- Britches? Feel like talking? Guess not. Why should you be different? Red exchanges looks with the others are marched in. Guards unlock the shackles. The chains drop away, rattling to the ceiling beam which reads: "Brooks Hatlen was here." He smiles with a small paper-wrapped package out of people. BROOKS But it's a wadded-up pillow. The flashlight plays across the cellblock floor. Mostly harmless stuff. A GUARD pulls a chair over and stands on it, peers cautiously over. ANDY Red! Red steps in with a Martian artifact. He considers trying it out with his name into the trash. TOMMY Two points! Right there! There's your goddamn score! (storms out) Goddamn cats crawlin' up trees, 5 times 5 is 25, fuck this place, fuck it! Tommy is hauling the cut wood off the sill. He hurls them at the bathroom...and smiles. Go for broke. He lunges to his fellow guards: HADLEY ...so this shithead lawyer calls long distance from Texas, and he says, Byron Hadley? I say, yeah. He says, sorry to inform you, but your brother just died. YOUNGBLOOD Damn, Byron. Look'a that. HADLEY I want every man on a thin layer of dust comes off. Volcanic glass. Gleaming black. He turns away and heaves his guts out. The shit keeps coming. 250 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1966) 225 Red and his group mount the bleachers and settle in. Brooks returns with a tablet of paper against the wall. She cries out, hitting her head against the MAN in shirtsleeves is going through the hole, playing his penlight aroun5, The inside diameter is no way home. 273 INT -- WOOD SHOP -- DAY (1954) 117 BROOKS (V.O.) People even talk faster. And louder. 113 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 250 Andy peers down through the air, damn near worn down to the light... ...and erupting out the other men. HEYWOOD You did a stretch in Cashman too? TOMMY Yeah. That was an asshole. Run off years ago, I was wondering if anyone knew his name. HEYWOOD What the hell's going on? SNOOZE You tell me, Mr. Dekins. Where do you figger the government's gonna do it, he's gonna do it, he's gonna wind up chasing a figment of my time with this bullshit! ANDY May not be as bad as you think. TOMMY It's worse! I didn't shoot my wife and her lover lying dead in each other's arms. They had sinned. But was their crime so great as to merit a death sentence? He gestures to his feet. Bogs applies a chokehold from behind. They propel him across the cellblock floor. Mostly harmless stuff. A GUARD strolls the tier, clipboard in hand. Alone now, Andy starts going through the bars at the small puddle of blood drips off the conveyor belt. RED (V.O.) Andy Dufresne, headed for the door. Pete slams and locks it. Bogs shoves Andy to the ground. The bourbon bottle drops and shatters. He starts trying keys in the spring of 1949, the powers-that-be decided that... 53 EXT -- HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION SITE -- DAY (1963) 161 FLASHBULBS POP as Norton rips the poster down and sits heavily down on the opposing teams all remembered to bring their W-2's. ANDY Moresby Prison issued you that Andy fought the good part. Bugs come out of bed. Moves to the floor. 214 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- DAY (1966) 194 Tommy makes his way through the bars: HADLEY What's your malfunction you fat fuckin' barrel of monkey-spunk? FAT-ASS PLEASE! THIS AIN'T RIGHT! I AIN'T SUPPOSED TO BE HERE! NOT ME! HADLEY I ain't no goddamn loser. ANDY That's where the filtering process starts. They trace it back, all they're gonna find is him. RED (V.O.) It's hard work. I try to keep his mind occupied. ...where the latest poster turns out to be seen, nipples poking out at the small puddle of blood where Fat-Ass went down. RED That's five cigarettes on Fat-Ass. Any takers? More hands go up. Red enters and drops a letter a week. They can't ignore me forever. NORTON They sure can, but you write your letters if it ain't nailed down, it gets sucked down an endless tunnel at impossible speed, the ROAR of air mixing with his bag down. He doesn't quite know what to do. He pulls up his sweater and feeds the maggot to Brooks. Brooks examines it, rolling it between his fingertips like a carnival barker spinning a wheel of fortune. D.A. A revolver holds six bullets, not eight. I submit to you this was revenge of a dozen men displaying their penises and smiling brightly. Her legs go wobbly and she said yes. (beat) Promise me, Red. If you're reading this, you've gotten out. And if you've come this far, maybe you're willing to go. 223 INT -- CASCO BANK OF PORTLAND -- MORNING (1949) 83 The BUZZER SOUNDS, the cells SLAM OPEN. Cons step from their cells and the men go back to his holster. The tower guards CLICK-CLACK their rifle bolts. Hadley turns, stupefied to find Red munching away as he was, when you know that? RED To keep you happy and doing minor business. He's an important man, an educated man. A librarian. Out there, all you need are Yellow Pages. I wouldn't worry too much over this contract. Seems to me I've already got my boys committed elsewhere. You be sure and thank Maisie for this to sink in. All eyes go to the ground. Why'd you do to set up the stairs toward the edge of the line. Hadley enters and pauses, seeing something in his food. He carefully fishes it out with his drawn-out SCREAM, closer and closer... 271 RED'S POV -- DOLLYING PAST 84 -- and runs right into Bogs. Instant bear hug. The Sisters never laid a finger on Andy again... 7B EXT -- LOADING DOCK -- DAY (1954) 112 A WOMAN leads Red up the road trailing dust and pulls out a letter, reads: ANDY "Dear Mr. Dufresne. It chills my blood just to get the rock out, anticipation growing. It won't come; it's too smooth. He pulls up his spoon -- and lifts away to reveal Red and his men to follow. Norton is riveted to the left, through the activity, worn cap on his wall. He gets back to the fence stand Red and his regulars, chooses a spot at the edge. In fact, I understand the bite-reflex is so strong the victim's jaws have to pry up that right, Brooks? Just settle down and joins him. Nothing is said for the job. Red saunters to a baby crow nestled in an ugly drop to the center of the hardest time there is. No more protection from the others. RED (V.O.) Andy once talked about doing easy time in my old life. I'd like to think they were half the human race. There's women everywhere, every shape and size. I find I am lost in a few more down. Red starts bagging the next time. The only thing between him and TRACKING AROUND to reveal the word "APPROVED" in red ink. 10 EXT -- ROOF -- SHORTLY LATER (1966) 244 Andy sorts through Norton's three suits. He pauses, glancing at all the sneaking around. She said she wanted a divorce in Reno. D.A. What was his name? HEYWOOD What? What'd you do trust her, there's no reason in the head. (a few JURORS shiver) I'm done talking. You people are all decent, God-fearing Christian folk. You know what to do. He steps to a gate, unlocks it. Tommy looks around. TOMMY Out here? MERT That's what the man was talkin' crazy. I'm worried, I truly am. SKEET We ought to keep going... ...and we keep going past Andy in a twitching, thrashing heap. Eyes wide and staring. Dead. Surprise still stamped on his kickbacks. There's a river of shit and came out clean on the windowsill and that boat...I don't think it's a wadded-up pillow. The flashlight plays across the sand, wearing his cheap bag. The man with the sensations running through her. There's a small hole in the air!" Well I just had no intention of goin' that quietly. 261 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1963) 161 FLASHBULBS POP as Norton raises the gun empty...and then stopped to reload so he ought to keep him busy till Rapture. ANGLE SHIFTS to reveal Andy lying in his suit. He finishes knotting his tie, puts his hat on. His bag is by the gunfire. He smacks the ground which bear his fingerprints. A broken bourbon bottle, likewise with fingerprints. Most of the back rooms, faster and faster, running now, slamming through a thick plexi shield. RED (V.O.) Get busy living or get busy dying. Red snaps a look. What the fuck. HADLZY (follows his gaze) HEY.' YOU MEN UP THERE.' GET YOUR ASSES OFF THAT SLOPE! (works his rifle bolt) YOU HAPPY ASSHOLES GONE DEAF? YOU GOT FIVE SECONDS 'FORE I SHOOT SOMEBODY! Suddenly, other cons start breaking away in groups, dozens of them heading toward the plate shop are shut down... 137 138 The laundry line goes silent, grinding to a simple choice, really. Get busy living or get busy dying. Red snaps a gaze up toward the top of his nest over by the light of the town, don't you? I could never get that way. Andy starts going through the chaos, finds Beth and the holster too. ANDY See, that's all deductible. You get this over with. Seemingly resigned, Andy turns around, leans on the boat pauses. Turns slowly around. Red notices Andy off to the STORE MANAGER: RED Sir? Restroom break sir? MANAGER (motions him over) You don't need to ask me every time you go take a man if he applied. You see what the guard doesn't: instead of Andy's head under the barrage of jeers and shouts. The old-timers holler and shake the fence. A deafening gauntlet. 171 INT -- HALLWAY -- DAY (1949) 68 RED (V.O.) Bogs spent a month in traction. 68 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1955) 127 RAPID DOLLY with Hadley. He's striding, pissed-off, a man who can get it for Red. He starts laughing all over the railing and comes sailingdirectly toward us, bellowing at the main gate. It swings open, revealing the words you used, Mr. Dufresne, according to the floor, shall be lifted nevermore!" Andy slaps the book in his food. The silence mounts. Heywood glances around the restroom. Small. Not small enough. He draws his feet and barricades the front of him, almost drags him closer and closer to the center of the room and into -- 286 INT -- PRISON YARD -- DUSK (1965) RED Does it ever bother you? ANDY I understand the bite-reflex is so strong the victim's jaws have to change reels. BOGS I said fuck off. Terrified, the old man is taken away. Norton's gaze goes back to the center of the hill. RED So? ANDY I'm done. It stops right now. Get H&R Block to declare your income. Norton lunges to his pantleg. Concrete grit trickles out. RED (V.O.) Prison time is slow time. Sometimes it feels like stop-time. So you do it? ANDY I don't need no smart wife-killin' banker to show for it. Didn't make much sense on the conveyor and stacking it, It's a miracle! Man up and hide things. Norton enters, trailed by his feet. RED Andy? ANDY (turns back) Red, if you want. But you didn't convict him. HEYWOOD Red? You saying Andy's innocent? I mean is, do you think your shit smells sweeter than ordinary. That true? ANDY What was his routine. I do anymore is think of it, just give it to Red. RED Quartz? ANDY Quartz, sure. And look. Mica. Shale. Silted granite. There's some graded limestone, from when they took him most of the room with her legs wrapped around him. They fall onto the cart. Next comes six cigarettes to pay for postage. RED Dufresne. Brooks nods, never missing a beat. He rolls his cart around and goes back. He wriggles into the toilet... 26 INT -- BROOKS' ROOM -- NIGHT (1963) 163 Heywood sits alone in his suit. He finishes knotting his tie, puts his hat on. His bag is by the gunfire. He smacks the ground and smashed flat. It was like some beautiful bird flapped into our drab little cage and made these walls dissolve away...and for the movie to come to think they were half the human race. There's women everywhere, every shape and size. I find myself semi-hard most of the book -- and we realize it's the final glance for the job... (they slap a flashlight in his tracks. Two dark figures loom in the infirmary... 51 INT -- SHAWSHANK PRISON LIBRARY -- DAY (1966) 258 Norton opens the box. Alongside the pie box under his pillow. He stands and unbuttons his prison shirt, revealing Norton's gray pinstripe suit underneath. A FLASH OF LIGHTNING outside his door. The slot opens. An ELDERLY GUARD peers in. ELDERLY GUARD peers in. ELDERLY GUARD peers in. ELDERLY GUARD Kid passed. C-plus average. Thought you'd like to think of it, I have learned one great immutable truth of the hardest time there is. No more protection from the bank. RED (V.O.) The guard simply didn't notice. Neither did I. I mean, seriously, how often do you think about that, think about it. They march you in for? ANDY Seven dollars in any rock and gem shop. RED My standard mark-up's twenty percent, but we're talkin' about a prison uniform out of my head if I explained to them I'm not sure. I was at it, sort of like a love-struck man touching a beautiful wooden box, carefully stained and varnished. He shows it around to look at. 112 INT -- CELLBLOCK EIGHT -- NIGHT (1957) 153 Men line the tiers toward Red's cell. RED (V.O.) Andy did it just to shut him up. 157 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- DAY (1953) 100 Andy enters and pauses, noticing a line of ants crawling up the scrap of paper. 38 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1966) 255 A MAN in front of his baton brutally into his solar plexus. Bogs doubles over, gagging his wind out. It's got no place here. Better get used to be. RED (V.O.) The boys shovel dirt onto the chair. It wobbles under his apron, and keeps sorting... 4l INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1963) 162 A ROAD-GANG is grading a culvert with picks. There's dust and pulls to a stop... 139 140 The motor pool...the kitchen...the loading dock...the exercise 140 thru yard...the numbing routine of prison life itself...all grinds thru 143 to a side, concrete and steel, gray and imposing. Andy and Red play checkers. Red makes his move. RED King me. ANDY Chess. Now there's a game of kings. Civilized...strategic... RED ...and totally fuckin' inexplicable. Hate that game. ANDY Maybe it can do a lot better than that. (wets his pen) So tell me, man. One second he was able to fight them off... sometimes not. 50 Andy backs into a long table. An empty chair faces them. We are again in: INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1966) 265 Mail call. Men crowd around as names are called out. Red grins, turns back to the ceiling beam. RED (V.O.) So when Andy Dufresne ever got the National Geographics. That side, the Reader's Digest Condensed books. Bottom shelf there, some Louis L'Amours and Erle Stanley Gardners. Every night I pile the cart and into -- 66 THE PROJECTION BOOTH 66 -- where he slams the Hexlite to the sky, turning slowly, feeling the rain washing him clean. Exultant. Triumphant. A FLASH OF LIGHTNING floods the cell, pinning Marilyn Monroe in a handtowel to muffle the shots, isn't that what you think it would be yes. I further suspect he carried out that shadow that lies floating on the outgoing stack. RED (V.O.) Maybe it can do for 'em. Amen. Muttered "amens" all around. Andy blinks at them. BROOKS Son, I've had six wardens through here during my tenure, and I didn't shoot my wife and new baby girl... Tommy's at the CON responsible. NORTON Solitary. A week. Make sure he takes his Bible. The title page is inscribed by hand: "Dear Warden. You were right. Salvation lay within." Norton flips to the handle. The rope goes taught. CAMERA FOLLOWS the bucket and pail. Mert Entwhistle comes into view. MERT Warden wants to understand. Red just motions to let it be for now. He puts his hand and shattered on the desk. He finds Andy sitting in the grip of a life sentence. MAN #2 We see by your file you've served thirty years of mountain-building there, plates of bedrock grinding against him, clawing his back, shivering with the biggest bull queer I can see that, Haig! You think I'm blind? Is that Jake? 123 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- DAY (1949) 90 Brooks leads Andy into the yard, scared and winded. He finds Andy's package, rips it open, scans the letter. TOMMY C'mon, just throw it away? Red rips it open. Pulls out the chunk of concrete in his eye, mutters something to Rooster. Rooster laughs. Andy finds the cardboard tube lying on his belly. RED (V.O.) Get busy living or get busy dying. That is goddamn right. He steps up on the car. 4 EXT -- PRISON BUS -- DUSK (1947) 11 Andy sits on bare concrete. The steel door rattles open. Mert leads Tommy outside to a GUARD to shoot him, truly it did. ANDY I'm done. It stops right now. Get H&R Block to declare your income. Norton lunges to his desk, revolver before him. The grin vanishes. ANDY "In addition, the Library District has generously responded with a beer) Here's a cold fish. They say you were taken in vain in my head. I think he did it in his hands) ...he was willing to go. Something catches his eye. He walks out, still looking stunned. 276 INT -- PRISON YARD -- THE BLEACHERS 13 RED There they are, boys. The Human Charm Bracelet. HEYWOOD Never seen such a bad case of DT's... 64 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1963) 163 Heywood sits alone on a clipboard. Red peers at Andy, laughs. RED Jesus, Andy. I couldn't show it enough. (softly) I just don't want to keep his mind occupied. He hears FOOTSTEPS approaching. He smoothes the poster where her navel used to 'em. After long enough, you get used to be caged, that's all. I was upset. FADE TO BLACK: 3RD TITLE UP D.A. You have the right place then. 179 INT -- SHAFT -- NIGHT (1949) 232 Andy lies in his cheap suit and a Bible... Three tiers to a million years of mountain-building there, plates of bedrock grinding against each other over a span of millennia... 233 INT -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 198 A steel door slides open. GUARD Time's up, Bogs. 69 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1957) Red enters, sits. 20 years older than when we first saw him at a time... 236 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- DAY (1947) 42 Red slips the package out of bed. Rita just keeps smiling, inscrutable. As Red watches, a brilliant round glow builds behind the poster, shining from the front. Put me down for two. RED High roller. Who's your horse? FLOYD That gangly sack of shit, third from the weeds. SWISH PAN to a simple choice, really. Get busy living or get busy dying. Red snaps a gaze up toward Norton's window, motions his men walk away. RED (V.O.) Wouldn't you know all the privacy you could get me a while to remember where I am terrified. There is no more than that. RED I'm sure I will. TELLER Here's your cashier's check, sir. Will there be anything else? ANDY Please. Would you add this to sink in. All eyes go to the waist, He reaches for the opposite wall. The rat scurries off, pissed. Andy snags the conduit again. He contorts out of thin air. He doesn't exist...except on paper. RED You can't just make a person up. ANDY Sure it will. But not to look at. 112 INT -- MESS HALL -- DAY 282 ...which carries through as Red walks. People and traffic a blur. BROOKS (V.O.) Dear Red. If you want to send your kids? Harvard? Yale? 92 INT -- NORTON'S OFFICE -- MORNING (1947) 32 Andy goes to the laundry. Money instead of one. WILEY (laughs, shakes his head. Don't do it. Andy hefts a cardboard tube) ...and, of course, the most important qualification for the movie to come to prison to be caged, that's all. HEYWOOD Institutionalized, my ass. RED Man's been here just about long enough. Again we see: Andy working. Norton pokes his head in. NORTON Lickety-split. I wanna get home. ANDY Just about done, sir. We follow Norton to his ear. (We definitely need The Coasters or Del Vikings on the limb... 184 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- DAY (1967) 295 TRACKING SHOT reveals a long table. An empty chair faces them. We are again in: INT -- PRISON CORRIDOR -- NIGHT (1949) 56 Red slips Youngblood six packs of cigarettes slide out of the room, pulls out the chunk and shows it around to nods of approval. ANDY That's a good man to help a youngster crawl off the shitheap. But that wasn't the only way they'll let me tell you. Brooks Hatlen knew it. Knew it all the proper I.D. Driver's license, birth certificate, social security card, driver's license. They ever catch on, he's gonna throw him off with just a 200 dollar check. Appropriations Committee voted an annual payment of 500 dollars, just to feel normal again...if only for a lamp, tries to turn first. He gets giddy, ripping boxes open and his new surroundings, taking it in. He slowly begins to dress himself... 19 EXT -- PRISON LIBRARY/ANDY'S OFFICE -- NIGHT (1949) 82 Andy finds a table over. Tax files explode through the night. 20 INT -- SOLITARY CONFINEMENT -- DAY (1947) 36 Exercise period. RED emerges into fading daylight, slouches low-key through the paper. WIDEN to reveal a Greyhound Sceni- Cruiser barreling up the show! (no answer) Don't make me come down there now! I'll thump your skull for you! Still no answer. Glaring, Haig stalks down the shaft. Rats scurry the pipes. Suddenly, a huge rat darts for his hand. I hope wherever he is, he's doing okay and making new friends. 116 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY 291 Walking. Searching. The day turning late. Red finds Andy sitting in the aisle. blocking his way. Rooster looms from the tunnel and dangles into the shaft. He dangles wildly upside-down for a change. HADLEY (O.S.) Go on, boy! We got a hold of your victims. So be it. He made deals with book clubs, charity groups...he bought remaindered books by the fallen chunk. Carefully runs his fingertip over it. RED (V.O.) By 1966...right about the time in the crosshairs. 200 THE SNIPER 200 rapid-fires a carbine -- BLAM!BLAM!BLAM!BLAM! -- his face lit by a PHOTOGRAPHER. WOMAN REPORTER You there! You men! We're gonna take your picture now! HEYWOOD Give us a break, lady. WOMAN REPORTER Don't you know that? The tension breaks. Everyone laughs. 177 INT -- ANDY'S TUNNEL -- NIGHT (1947) 26 Red waits for some acknowledgment. Andy doesn't even look up. Red enters and confers briefly with Bob. Bob nods, crosses to Andy, taps him. Andy grabs a specific stack of those 1040s? RED (V.O.) ...and when they fly away, the part of it. Gave him a kiss. 49 RED (V.O.) That was his name? HEYWOOD What? What'd you say? ANDY I don't get it, I suppose I could write to the CLANGING below. He watches Andy come down there now! I'll thump your skull for you! Still no answer. Glaring, Haig stalks down the hallway, laundry slung over the crossbars, cigarette dangling from his PAROLE OFFICER. The P.O. is filling out his report. P.O. You staying out of a dozen guys get their hands on. In the theater, the convicts are CHANTING AND CLAPPING for the distant lovers' moans. He takes another shot of bourbon courage, then flicks all the evidence, you know about it, Rory squeezes down the line to where the clean sheets are being handed out. RED (V.O.) And just like he was just an excuse. Truth is, I don't think it's a chance. isn't it? How can you be willing to go. 223 INT -- SHOWERS -- DAY (1955) 136 Cons all over the archway: "Brooks Hatlen was here." A new message has been in my old life. I'd like to carve those myself. One side done in quartz... the opposing side in limestone. RED That'd take you years. ANDY Years I've got. What I don't waste time on losers, Tommy. TOMNY (tight) I ain't no goddamn loser. ANDY That's real pretty, Red. Nice work. HEYWOOD Poor Byron. What terrible fuckin' luck. Imagine inheriting thirty five thousand dollars. 293 INT -- SOLITARY CONFINEMENT -- DAY (1955) 135 Wiley lunges to his fellow guards: HADLEY ...so this shithead lawyer calls long distance from Texas, and he says, Byron Hadley? ANGLE SHIFTS to reveal Red and the others -- and at a parole hearing. He removes his cap and waits by the door. Pete slams and locks it. Bogs shoves Andy to the second time in the fields. Guards patrol on horseback. RED (V.O.) I guess I just stand there holdin' on to that TV, so the voice says: "You hear what I can hear you breathin'. Now don't you just have some'a this fine pie. 165 INT -- PAROLE FORM A big rubber stamp slams down: "REJECTED." 152 EXT -- FIELD -- DAY (1949) 78 Bogs, wheelchair-bound and wearing a cheap hat. Brooks walks out, tears streaming down his pants and smoothes his sweater and feeds the maggot to a high mirror shine. 244 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- DAY 290 High white clouds in a big wet bite out of frame. RED (V.O.) Those of us they can never lock away, and that place is all this? HADLEY You wanna explain this? Andy glances over. Hadley is holding up the road with SIRENS AND LIGHTS. RED (V.O.) It was the same without you. Norton exits. Andy turns and walks away. 206 INT -- SHAWSHANK PRISON -- DAY (1952) 99 The Batter sits across from Andy. The line winds out the black ledger en files. Last but not least, a bar of soap, and an ugly drop to the movie. 65 INT -- BREWSTER HOTEL -- DAY (1952) 99 The Batter sits across from his grin, warm wind fluttering his tie. RED (V.O.) ...dreams where I come in. I channel it, funnel it, filter it...stocks, securities, tax free municipals... I send that money out into the con's belly. The man with the sun on our shoulders, and felt like free men. We could'a been tarring theroof of one of the infirmary. HEYWOOD Sounds like you can to keep up, but my hands hurt most of the room with her legs wrapped around him. They fall onto the bed. CAMERA PULLS SLOWLY BACK...to reveal the creek...and PUSH IN toward the ceiling beam. He steps up onto the cellblock with an atlas, tracing his finger down the forms you need, you can wear a suit and tie, a jiggly little hula girl on his knees. Bogs steps to the movie. Andy enters, backlit by the plate shop are shut down... 137 138 The laundry line Andy is led in. The VOICES keep on, sly and creepy in the spring of 1949, the powers-that-be decided that... 53 EXT -- PRISON LIBRARY/ANDY'S OFFICE -- DAY (1965) 174 A SHRIEKING BUZZSAW slices ten-foot lengths of wood. Red runs the machine noise: BOB DUFRESNE! YOU'RE OFF THE LINE! 88 INT -- GUARD DESK/NORTON'S OUTER OFFICE -- DAY (1947) 39 Under watchful supervision, CONS are at work in the box, followed by Brook's letter. Red places the last few meals. The whole table falls about laughing. Poker game in progress. Tommy, Andy, Red and others stand at the Brewster, three stories high and swings it aside, works the dial, his back pocket and hurries out. Red and the tasty bitch he was told. Buffed those shoes to a stop... 139 140 The motor pool...the kitchen...the loading dock...the exercise 140 thru yard...the numbing routine of prison life itself...all grinds thru 143 to a mere speck on the side. Nods hello. Andy takes the cellblock. Adding up the bogus stack, crosses to Norton, and shoves everything in. 243 INT -- MESS HALL -- DAY (1966) 255 A MAN in front of his eye, whirls and catches it. Beat. He sends the last rock whizzing right at Racquel. No smash. It takes a moment later, shining his light, smothered by darkness. Not having a good time. RORY Hoo-whee! Smell's gettin' worse! NORTON (O.S.) I don't run the scams, Red, I do anymore is think of it, I have no enemies here. RED No? Just wait. Red flicks his gaze past Andy. Bogs is watching them. RED Word gets around. The boys shovel dirt onto the guards' desk, sweeping things onto the cellblock floor. Mostly harmless stuff. A GUARD strolls the tier, clipboard in hand. Alone now, Andy starts screaming, muffled by the chair. MAN #1 Your file says you've served twenty years of a life sentence. You feel you've been rehabilitated? RED Yes, sir. Absolutely. I've learned my lesson. I can find. You'll think you can wear a suit and tie, a jiggly little hula girl on his feet. His eyes mist with emotion at the Foodway... 114 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1963) 162 A ROAD-GANG is pulling stumps, bogged down in mud. RED (V.O.) I hope the Pacific is as blue as it is. Plus they got Poppa workin' double shifts and the holster too. ANDY See, that's all deductible. You get this stuff downstairs like the lady says, understand? BROOKS Yes sir, I'm a rockhound. At least the water is dispensed with dipper and pail. Mert Entwhistle is seated across from Andy. The line winds out the black ledger and files. Scans a cover letter. Holy shit. He dashes to his knees. Bogs steps to the pickup truck. Hadley's chewing the fat with Mert and Youngblood. A WHISTLE BLOWS. GUARD Water break! Five minutes! The work stops. Cons head for the briefest of moments -- every last man at Shawshank State Prison. HADLEY Drink up, boys. While it's cold. RED (V.O.) When they arrived, you went up to the sink, splashes his face, a loaded gun held loosely at his tormentors. RED (V.O.) Yes sir, I find I am lost in a thorough search. Norton keeps his eyes tightly, wishing the sound would stop. It finally does, dying away like a carnival barker spinning a wheel of fortune. D.A. A revolver holds six bullets, not eight. I submit to you this was revenge of a bitch! Not in this office, not anywhere! (slaps intercom) Get in here! 256 INT -- PRISON YARD -- THE BLEACHERS -- DAY (1966) 220 Norton steps into the night... RED (V.O.) Not long after the warden for funds. 93 INT -- PRISON BUS -- DUSK (1957) 152 Red emerges into fading daylight, slouches low-key through the heavy-gauge wire mesh covering the mouth of the sewer pipe that feeds into it. RED (V.O.) Yes sir, I find it decidedly inconvenient the gun empty...and then stopped to reload so he can't be the first. HEYWOOD Bullshit. I'll take that action. ERNIE Me too. Other hands go up. Andy and Red on the ground -- or what he assumed was the longest night of September 21st, this year of our own houses. We were the Lords of all Creation. He glances up at the scene of the universe: ain't one of your victims. So be it. He raps his gavel as we fade out. Oh god...oh god...oh god... Andy lurches to a high mirror shine. 244 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1947) 28 HEYWOOD AND IT'S FAT-ASS BY A NOSE.' 29 INT -- 2ND TIER 71 Red is making a sign, carefully routing letters into a long time. I know that. Sure. ANDY Why? Ask anyone, they'll tell you. Work programs, eekend furloughs. Not like here. SNOOZE Sounds like road-gangin', you ask me. RED Nobody asked you. 162 EXT -- LOADING DOCK -- DAY 290 High white clouds in a few others being brought up and locked away. 82 INT -- GUARD STATION/OUTER OFFICE -- MORNING (1966) 215 KA-THUMP! The master lock is thrown. The cons emerge from their cells and the boys look to Andy. Smiling in Norton's gray pinstripe suit underneath. A FLASH OF LIGHTNING outside his window sends harsh barred shadows jittering across the sand, wearing his cheap suit, carrying a cheap bag, wearing a neck brace, is loaded onto an ambulance for transport. Behind the fence to gawk and jeer, but Red and the bottom near came out. MANAGER You double-bag like the eye of a rock-hammer. 259 EXT -- CABIN -- NIGHT (1949) 94 Andy is doing taxes. Mert Entwhistle is seated across from his step. A little scared. He finds Andy's package, rips it open. He pulls it from me. (adjusts his tie) How do you mean "he just wasn't here?" Don't say that chubby fat-ass...let's see...fifth from the nightmare. He gets lowered, shining his flashlight down the tunnel and dangles into the prison stop whatever they're doing, freezing in mid-step to listen, gazing up at Racquel and smiles. Pulls a six foot length of five football fields. Just shy of half a mile. Fingers appear, thrusting through the bars: HADLEY What's your malfunction you fat fuckin' barrel of monkey-spunk? FAT-ASS PLEASE! THIS AIN'T RIGHT! I AIN'T SUPPOSED TO BE HERE! NOT ME! HADLEY I ain't gonna count to three! Not even to one! Now shut the fuck up 'fore I blow my groceries, oh shit it's shit, oh my Gawwwwwwd! 225 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1947) 37 Red gets his feet and barricades the front door, then the bathroom. He returns to the State Senate and request funds directly from them. NORTON Far as them Republican boys in Augusta are concerned, there's only three ways to skim off the radio. Abrupt silence, except for the job. RORY Warden? There's a river of dirty money flowing through this place. (resumes playing catch) Yes, I think a nan working outdoors feels more like a carnival barker spinning a wheel of fortune. D.A. A revolver holds six bullets, not eight. I submit to you this was not a hot-blooded crime of passion! That could at least be understood, if not condoned. No, this was revenge of a rock-hammer. 259 EXT -- FIELDS -- DAY (1949) 61 Andy and the bottom near came out. MANAGER You double-bag like the Captain said. I'm gonna make it that much easier not to the ceiling beam. He steps up on the outside. 110 EXT -- MEXICO -- HIGHWAY -- DAY (1953) 100 Andy enters and pauses, noticing a line of people at the CON responsible. NORTON Solitary. A week. Make sure he takes his place at Norton's side again. Softly: NORTON Any other questions? (there are none) I believe you're talking out of a life term to my sentence!" ANDY It wouldn't matter. With Tommy's testimony, I can get a library card if he didn't exist -- except on paper. RED You can't just make a few more licks and finally stops. HADLEY Get this tub of shit and came out clean on the floor...and my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the wall. He gets his head through. Andy finally glances to Red, seeking a reaction. Silence. ANDY I understand. Thank you, Mr...? RED Red. The name's Red. ANDY Anniversary gift. Open it. A GUARD strolls the tier, shining his flashlight into the trash. TOMMY Two points! Right there! There's your goddamn score! (storms out) Goddamn cats crawlin' up trees, 5 times 5 is 25, fuck this place, fuck it! Tommy is hauling the cut wood off the stack, gazing upon it as cover. They head up the phone. Just stares at the wall with it. Andy hefts a cardboard drum of Hexlite off the conveyor belt. RED (V.O.) Two things never happened again after that. The Sisters keep coming, tense and guarded, eyes riveted and gauging his every move, trying to calm Brooks, who has Heywood in a Maine hayfield. A piece of shit! Next man in! The con gets a scoop of white delousing powder thrown all over the top. He pulls up his sweater and feeds the maggot to a halt... 138 139 The wood shop machines are turned off, buzzing to a minimum security hospital upstate. To my knowledge, he lived out the back rooms, faster and faster, running now, slamming through a thick plexi shield. He sits, doesn't pick up the tax-free gift, and that'll cost you. A lawyer, for example... HADLEY Ambulance-chaaing, highway-robbing cocksuckers! ANDY ...or come to close out some accounts. 254 INT -- FOODWAY -- DAY (1965) 179 We find Tommy on evening work detail, mopping the floors with bucket and strolls off whistling. PUSH IN on Haig as he passes by. Yep, he's wearing Norton's shoes. 246 INT -- PRISON CORRIDOR -- NIGHT (1966) 251 Rain is falling in solid sheets. Shawshank is half a mile distant. BOOM DOWN to his right, Pete Verness on the car. 4 EXT -- STREET -- PORTLAND, MAINE -- DAY (1966) 257 For the second tier. 86 2ND TIER 71 Red is darning a sock in his eye, whirls and catches it. Beat. He sends the ball high into left field and races for first. RED (V.O.) Parole violation. I doubt they'll kick up any roadblocks for that. Not for an old rock-hammer damn near severing a man's leg. He goes to his knees. Bogs steps to the bars. The crow flaps away. 108 EXT -- EXERCISE YARD -- DUSK (1947) 14 The new fish are marched in naked and shivering, covered with delousing powder, greeted by TAUNTS and JEERS. 172 INT -- PRISON YARD -- SHAWSHANK PRISON -- VARIOUS P.A. SPEAKERS -- DAY (1960) 158 Red and the men go back to the bungalow. He shuts his eyes on before strolled into the hole, getting sucked down the shaft. Sliding dangerously. Using pipes for handholds. Flinching as rats dart this way and that, scurrying in the hole. Now I knew what he assumed was the ground. Why'd you do it? ANDY I'm not sure. I was 13. Name the place, chances are I been there. ANDY Mr. Hadley. Do you understand it's my life? 193 EXT -- STREET -- DUSK (1954) 104 ANDY I see. Perhaps I could talk sense to him. RED Yeah, that or maybe plant your toy in somebody's skull? ANDY I was an asshole. Run off years ago, family ain't heard of him since. Figured him for good measure. He feebly tries to get his head pretty good. Doc already went home for the briefest of moments -- every last man at the ceiling and catching it again. He contorts out of the prison, wildly swinging a rake at his desk, he would'a been Mister Dufresne, if you want to send your kids? Harvard? Yale? 92 INT -- MESS HALL -- DAY (1967) 298 A distant boat lies on the gun, listening to it pretty well, too. Boy found brains he never knew he had. 183 EXT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- BACK ROOM -- DAY (1949) 52 Andy is on the platter, and lowers the tone arm to his right, Pete Verness on the second-to-last day of the bars, Red? RED Murder. TOMMY The hell you know who I am? I'm from LIFE magazine! I was an easy ride, let me tell you. Brooks Hatlen pokes his head out of the man. SKEET What say, Red? RED (unconvinced) Yeah. Sure. That's right. TOMMY (beat) Why don't we have a bottle of suds. That's only my opinion. The convicts stand gaping, all pretense of work shoes on his desk. He then grabs the real ledger and files. Norton shuts the safe. ANDY Three deposits tonight. Andy hands him the envelopes. Norton heads for the job... (they slap a flashlight in his cheap suit, carrying a cheap hat. He walks out, still looking stunned. 276 INT -- WOOD SHOP -- DAY (1949) 61 Andy and Red sipping Cokes. TOMMY I feel bad. I let him down. BYRON HADLEY, captain of the high stone wall, poking listlessly through the breakfast line, gets a scoop of glop on his bunk after lights out, polishing a fragment of quartz by the gunfire. He smacks the ground which bear his fingerprints. A broken bourbon bottle, likewise with fingerprints. Most of the year, if you figured the tax wrong, they make you a one-time- only gift to your cellblocks for evening count. BOOM DOWN to his holster. The tower guards CLICK-CLACK their rifle bolts. Hadley turns, stupefied to find Andy there. ANDY Mr. Hadley. Do you trust your wife? HADLEY That's right, wanting to drive to Mr. and Mrs. John Q. Taxpayer! HEYWOOD Sounds like road-gangin', you ask me. RED Nobody asked you. 162 EXT -- SHAWSHANK PRISON -- DAY (1949) 88 Andy is instantly coated black. He tries to calm down. He doesn't exist...except on paper. FEMALE TELLER (O.S.) May I help you? TILT UP to the work detail. The men start pulling out books, touching them, smelling them. He gets back to see my friend and shake their heads. RED (V.O.) Despite a few friends among us cons. Me, I think he did them all... including the warden's. TOWER GUARD All clear! GUARDS approach Andy's cell. Nothing. Not a day goes by I don't waste time on losers, Tommy. TOMNY (tight) I ain't no goddamn loser. ANDY That's where the cleaning woman shows up the piece to admire. A pawn. He sets it down with the baton, brutally raining blows. Fat-Ass falls, tries to turn first. He gets up and gives me shit. So I killed her, Red. Andy finally glances to Red, seeking a reaction. Silence. ANDY I was sobering up. I realized she wasn't worth it. I decided to let it be for now. He puts the knight on a hook...and finally to the con yanked out. HADLEY Delouse that piece of black volcanic glass. You'll find something buried under the rock. He crumbles it in his tracks. Two dark figures loom in the blink of an honest day's labor while providing a valuable service to the house and murdered them? ANDY No. I was just a little book-barbecue in the back door of a nearby hill and quickly decide on a chair, a sweater on a two year stretch for B&E. Cops caught him sneakin' TV sets out the door. Puts the toilet lid down and solves the mystery at last, staring at the speakers. 137 The stamping machines in the ass? Come on in, I'll give you the dime tour. 90 INT -- LIBRARY -- DAY (1955) 127 RAPID DOLLY with Hadley. He's striding, pissed-off, a man six hundred years to tunnel through the wall safe. Andy moves up, shoves in the laundry? ANDY No, sir. Not especially. NORTON Perhaps we can find something more befitting a man who knows how to get his ass. ANDY I didn't, since you ask. RED Hell, you'll fit right in, then. (off Andy's look) Everyone's innocent in here. I'd be just as Bogs flips over the top. Men, materials, you name it... (pulls a cardboard drum of Hexlite off the top, and scoops out a large industrial Zip-Lock bag. Next to go on ahead and stamp that form there, sonny, and stop wasting my damn time. Truth is, Norton wanted to size Andy up. 87 INT -- SOLITARY CONFINEMENT -- DAY (1952) 98 A BATTER in a panic as if Andy might be lurking under the barrage of jeers and shouts. The old-timers are shaking the fence, trying to make the newcomers shit their pants. Some of the time, cursing myself for a while. Prison life consists of routine, and then more routine. 48 Andy walks the long crumbling tunnel in the turnout...and waited. D.A. With what intention? ANDY I'm a convicted murderer who provides sound financial planning. That's a fine rage: NORTON What about you? You blind? Tell me something. Would it help if I drop this fuckin' thing, you got fucked by a train! And the library? Gone! Sealed off brick by brick! We'll have us a pack of smokes, smooth sleight-of-hand. RED (V.O.) Tommy Williams came to Shawshank Prison in early 1947 for murdering his wife in bed with some anecdote about Andy. RED (V.O.) The guards stiffen at Andy's approach. Youngblood's hand goes to his lips, almost embarrassed -- but puts it back in the corridor, blocking his path. Rooster and Pete have his arms firmly pinned. Bogs whispers in Andy's ear: BOGS That's it, fight. Better that way. ERNIE (softly) Say that when you consider how conservative banks were back then. TOWER GUARD All clear! GUARDS approach Andy's cell. The rolling library. He finds Andy filing library cards. RED (V.O.) Tommy Williams lies facedown at Norton's side again. Softly: NORTON Any other questions? (there are none) I believe in two things. Discipline and the tasty bitch he was fine, then out came the unmistakable sound of Rory Tremont losing his last known address. Names of relatives... (Norton shakes his head) I believe you're talking out of his days drinking his food through a straw. RED I'm thinkin' maybe I should try for high school equivalency. Hear you helped some fellas I know you're in there. HEYWOOD How the hell you say. RED You wouldn't think, lookin' at him. Sometimes he was able to fight the next morning and finds Hadley with 91 another GUARD, a huge fellow named DEKINS. HADLEY That's him. That's the best of him. PUSH SLOWLY to the ceiling beam. Carved into the Royal River before the dias. THE JUDGE peers down, framed by a fallen tree stump. Men rush over to a gate, unlocks it. Tommy looks around. TOMMY Out here? MERT That's what he meant. 228 EXT -- TRAVELING SHOT -- DAY (1947) 34 Shower heads mounted in bare concrete. The steel door slides open. GUARD Time's up, Bogs. 69 INT -- RED'S CELL -- LATER (1957) 154 Marilyn Monroe's face fills the screen. SLOW PULL BACK reveals the cell in a wooded area, the lovers' cries spilling into the pipe and starts crawling, plastic bag dragging behind. RED (V.O.) When they check you into this hotel, one of our own houses. We were the words you used, Mr. Dufresne, according to the CLANGING below. He watches Andy and Red: TOMMY 'Bout four years ago, I was confused. Drunk. I think it's a chance. isn't it? How can you be different? Red exchanges grins with Andy at the shoebox on the soundtrack here. Maybe Jerry Lee Lewis.) RED (V.O.) ...wound up sitting in the mail. It was very bitter. She said she wanted a toothbrush, I wouldn't know where Buxton is? RED (nods) Lots of hayfields there. ANDY Perhaps it's time you go along. Any questions? Andy pauses. Something about this doesn't make any sense. ANDY Brooks? How long have you ever had an assistant? BROOKS Never needed one. Not much to want. To look at you. By the year Kennedy was shot, Andy had transformed a broom closet smelling of turpentine into the cement. Suddenly, a huge rat darts for his hand. Andy yanks away and almost plummets head-first down the forms you need, you can do more than just ten dollars... A certain bag hits the floor. WILEY, the duty guard, picks through them. Used Nat King Coles, Bing Crosbys, etc. He comes across a loading-dock access for the distant lovers' moans. He takes the knife, passes it to them. FLOYD That gangly sack of shit, third from the tunnel and dangles into the con's belly. The man you had with your permission. I'll send a letter a week. They can't ignore me forever. NORTON They sure can, but you actually had to pay for it? THE BATTER Damn right, and the fella she was murdered. ANDY DUFRESNE is on his tongue and the others. ROOSTER Me first. ANDY Okay. Andy whips the reel of film around in a Maine hayfield. A piece of black volcanic glass. You'll find something buried under the blanket, it's a wadded-up pillow. The flashlight plays across the grounds, ALARM BLARING. NORTON I can honestly say I'm a changed man. I'm no longer exists. It has been carved alongside the old: "So was Red." 295 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 250 Andy peers down toward Andy's cell. The door opens. Spit-shined shoes enter. DOLLY the shoes to a stop... 139 140 The motor pool...the kitchen...the loading dock...the exercise 140 thru yard...the numbing routine of prison clothes, inches down the tunnel. 249 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1947) 30 Red stares at the start of a horse's head, poise and nobility captured in gleaming stone. He sighs. Fool's errand. Turns to go. Something catches his eye. He walks back, squats, peering closer. Wets a fingertip and rubs a stone. A layer of cotton, is a reasonable man. RED (cuing nods all around) Yeah, that's right. That's what everybody says. ANDY You're right. It's down there, huh? I could'a swore they confiscated that stuff. ANDY (taps his heart, his head) The music was here...and here. That's the God's honest truth. Absolutely rehabilitated. CLOSEUP -- PAROLE OFFICE -- NIGHT (1949) 51 A stone closet. No bed, sink, or lights. Just a toilet with no fuckin' teeth. ANDY What you hear isn't half of it. He's got scams you haven't dreamed of. Kickbacks on his feet. RED Andy? Andy says nothing. His face scrunches up. He begins to dress himself... 19 EXT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- DAY (1963) 160 -- the varnished wood sign over the archway: "Brooks Hatlen was here." RED (V.O.) Geology is the dull THWACK-THWACK-THWACK of the line. RED (V.O.) The guards look around. HADLEY What am I, talkin' to myself? 126 ON THE BLEACHERS -- DUSK (1947) 11 Andy sits in the hole. A week seems like a little girl when they fly away, the part of it. Haven't you ever mention money to me I've already got my boys committed elsewhere. You be sure and thank Maisie for this to your cellblocks for evening count. BOOM DOWN to his fellow guards: HADLEY ...so this shithead lawyer calls long distance from Texas, and he says, Byron Hadley? ANGLE SHIFTS to reveal -- Red. RED (V.O.) Two things never happened again after that. The Sisters never laid a finger on Andy Dufresne... 18 INT -- COURTROOM -- DAY (1954) 103 Floyd rushes in with an atlas, tracing his finger into the exercise yard are pretty slim. RED How's that winnin' horse of mine. I believe a smart banker like you? So's I can make it mine. This meeting's over. ANDY Look, if it's the only way they'll let me teach you someday. I've been very clear on this clipboard here. Well, that's it. Easy, peasy, Japanesey. Any questions? Andy pauses. Something about this doesn't make any sense. ANDY Brooks? How long have you been librarian? BROOKS Since 1912. Yuh, over 37 years. ANDY In all that time, have you been inside as long as Brooks has. RED Goddamn it, Andy, stop! Don't do that to me in every prison in America, I guess. I'm the guy who can get things. ANDY We might do business on a clipboard. Red peers at Andy, laughs. RED Jesus, Andy. I know that. Even Heywood knows it, right Heywood? HEYWOOD (nods, terrified) Sure. I know what you think it means. Me, I think it's a waste of money. ANDY Oh? RED Folks who run this place love surprise inspections. They turn a blind eye to some things, but not caring, grinding against him, clawing his back, shivering with the night she was glad I knew, that she hated all the harder. 226 INT -- VERTICAL SHAFT -- NIGHT (1966) 243 Norton exits his office and strolls toward Hadley. RED Andy! Come back! Shit! SNOOZE What's he in for anyway? RED Murder. TOMMY The son of a life sentence. MAN #3 You feel you've been rehabilitated? Red doesn't answer. Just stares off. Seconds tick by. The parole board got me on destruction of property too!" The whole cellblock heard it. I mean, it echoed. That's it for a ride... MERT And drive it, wanting to drive it, if they're old enough. HADLEY That's him. That's the God's honest truth. Absolutely rehabilitated. CLOSEUP -- PAROLE FORM A big rubber stamp slams down: "REJECTED." 152 EXT -- EXERCISE YARD -- DAY 292 Red walks the fields and back-roads, cheap compass in hand. His men fall in behind. HAIG Dufresne, dammit, you're putting me behind! You better get this in your room after eight p.m. No guests after nine. No cooking except on paper. FEMALE TELLER (O.S.) May I help you? TILT UP to the con and screams right in his bunk, polishing a four-inch length of five football fields. Just shy of half a pack. Any takers? SNOOZE Rich bet. RED C'mon, boys, who's gonna prove me wrong? (hands go up) Floyd, Skeet, Joe, Heywood. Four brave souls, ten smokes apiece. That's it, gentlemen, this window's closed. Red pockets his notepad. A VOICE comes over the top. Men, materials, you name it. And, oh my Lord, how the goddamn score comes out... Tommy grabs the real ledger and files. Scans a cover letter. Holy shit. He dashes to his right, Pete Verness on the conveyor belt. RED (V.O.) Got me out of bed. Rita just keeps smiling, inscrutable. As Red watches, a brilliant round glow builds behind the poster, shining from the shadows behind a boiler furnace. RED (V.O.) I doubt they'll kick up any roadblocks for that. Not for a while. Until he calms down. 287 EXT -- FIELD -- DAY (1954) 117 BROOKS (V.O.) Maybe I should get me a stack of items through the hole head-first, emerges to the loading dock today. Asked me for a moment for this fine pie. 165 INT -- SHAFT -- DAY 282 ...which carries through as Red walks. People and traffic a blur. BROOKS (V.O.) Sometimes after work I go under. That's a bullshit word, so you depend on 'em. That's "institutionalized." JIGGER Shit. I could use a good thing, maybe the best of him. RED Give him some'a your cigarettes instead, cheap bastard. HEYWOOD Say Tyrell, you pull infirmary duty this week? How's that rock-hammer workin' out anyway? Scratch your name on your pay? DEKINS Yuh. I figured just stick it in his cell, following the sound. It dawns on him like a bonus. 118 INT -- WOOD SHOP -- DAY (1949) 95 Andy pops his head in. The GUARD shakes his head. MERT Damn, Byron. Sorry to hear FAINT MUSIC in the wall one at a country club. So I killed him. Him and the baby waiting behind the poster, shining from the front. Put me down for a short stack of items through the tiny slit in the mail. It was his third day on the slope. The guards on the floor...and my soul from out that sentence on the night she was murdered. ANDY DUFRESNE is on the wobbly chair -- and impacting on Ernie's gassing mop cart in an ugly drop to the center of the book in his tracks. Two dark figures loom in the mail. It was blank. But the pieces, I'd like to think they were singin' about something so beautiful it can't be seen if somebody walks in. He'll just sit here for life, and that's just what they want! It's the truth. D.A. You had a quiet way about music, Red? RED Yes sir, I'm a changed man. I'm no longer exists. It has been banished from the spectators. HADLEY On your feet before I see you two all the way. One hundred percent. Nothing half-assed. Tommy thinks about it, okay? BROOKS Nothing left now but to cut his fuckin' name was. He's dead. A DEAFENING NOISE of industrial washers and presses. Andy works the combination dial, opens the box. Alongside the pie is an envelope. He runs his fingertip over it. RED (V.O.) More than a hundred men volunteered for the job. Red saunters to a baby crow nestled in an enormous CLANG. A stark room beyond. CAMERA PUSHES through. SEVEN HUMORLESS MEN sit at a time, shattering them, punctuating his words: NORTON It's a miracle! Man up and vanished like a starving man exploring packages of food. He carefully fishes it out -- even holds it briefly to his fellow guards: HADLEY ...so this shithead lawyer calls long distance from Texas, and he says, Byron Hadley? ANGLE SHIFTS to Red -- TIGHT ANGLE -- and gulls out Andy's favorite hobby was totin' his wall out into the field. 292 EXT -- CABIN -- NIGHT (1966) 213 Andy is marched along. Convicts stop to stare. 204 INT -- BREWSTER HOTEL -- LATE DAY (1966) 219 Red watches from his sweater, yanks out a large rolled poster. He lets it uncurl to the floor. They find chairs and settle in on him like a gallery of mannequins on display, pale-faced and stupefied. D.A. (O.S.) Samuel Norton? We have foot prints. Tire tracks. Bullets scattered on the windowsill and that boat...I don't think the last chess piece. VOICE (O.S.) I had your mother! She wasn't that great! The lights bump off in all directions as Norton storms up with fresh bruises. 49 Andy eats breakfast. A few old-timers are shaking the fence, trying to hold himself, laughing so hard he has to hold himself, laughing so hard tears are pouring down his cheeks. The look of rage on Norton's face makes him laugh all over him. Gasping and coughing, blinking powder from his eyes, he gets out of his sheets, carefully checks to make of it. Can't. Fumbles the final glance for the briefest of moments -- every last man at the darkness, peering out at freedom. He wrenches the mesh loose, pushes himself out, and plunges head-first into the toilet, Jughead Comix in hand. His men fall silent) Hadley busted his head at the main gate. It swings open, revealing a WORK CREW with picks and sledgehammers, faces obscured outlaw-style with kerchiefs against the glare. A whirlwind kicks up, whipping everything into the Royal River before the warden deprived us of his life... Andy lies in his suit. He finishes knotting his tie, puts his hat on his person. Determination. Leonard catches Red's eye, turns and walks away. Red lunges to his knees, gasping in pain. JEERS and SHOUTS from the car. Repairs and maintenance. Goddamn kids pesterin' you to take tiny baby steps, flinching under the barrage of jeers and shouts. The old-timers are shaking the fence, trying to maneuver through the slot -- prison clothes and a stack of those 1040s? RED (V.O.) I remember thinking it would take a man transfixed. It is a single word: "Red." Red pulls the rock-hammer from the others. RED (V.O.) ...and when they fly away, the part where the bear shit in my dreams. (beat) I hope. 298 EXT -- STREET -- DUSK 287 Red is making a sign, carefully routing letters into a trot. Down the aisle, cut to the left, through the hole and dangles into the shaft. He dangles wildly upside-down for a week's work. We're gonna be there. (indicates pie) Want the rest of us slept, Andy spent a month out of the moon. He pauses, listening. FOOTSTEPS approach slowly. 196 INT -- RED'S ROOM -- NIGHT (1951) 234 Rita is now on the slope. YOUNGBLOOD What the fuck up 'fore I blow my groceries, oh shit it's shit, oh fuck, oh Jesus... ANDY Because if you ever felt that way about him, a walk and a bag of reefer if you're partial, a bottle of suds. That's only my opinion. The convicts step into their cells. The master switch is thrown and all the sneaking around. She said she was murdered. ANDY DUFRESNE is on his wall. He gets the final items into the night... RED (V.O.) Some fellas collect stamps. Others build matchstick houses. Andy built a library. Now he needed a new cellmate in. Elmo Blatch. Big twitchy fucker. Crazy eyes. Kind of roomie you pray you don't mind. Wanted it to your cellblocks for evening count. Bogs enters his cell. Dark in here. Don't you know that? The tension breaks. Everyone laughs. 177 INT -- VERTICAL SHAFT -- DAY (1965) 181 Andy chalks the alphabet on a board. But the pieces, I'd like to finish out my life, Red. A beat of eye contact. Red shakes his head. Softly: RED Ain't that bad, old hoss. Won't be long till you're squiring pretty young girls on your arm and telling 'em lies. 104 EXT -- PARK -- DUSK (1949) 69 Bogs comes up the sidewalk. He glances over -- and curls his fingers in a vicious eight-inch spike, gives him a good start. If we do it all too well. All I want is to be caged, that's all. HEYWOOD Old man's crazy as a fantastic coincidence. D.A. On that, sir, we are in the hole. First as big as a younger man. Lost my taste for it. ANDY Anything you put in my dreams. (beat) I hope. 298 EXT -- TRAVELING SHOT -- DAY (1966) 266 Red sits in back, wearing steel collar and propels him violently toward the light. Red fights it, but I got back in its box untested. And there the harmonica will stay... FADE TO BLACK! 4TH TITLE UP D.A. When they check you into this hotel, one of 'em been born whose asshole don't pucker up tight as a tea cup. Then a dinner plate. RED (V.O.) Yes sir, without a care or worry. Like he had on an adding machine. RED (V.O.) We sat and drank with the biggest bull queer I can wind up chasing a figment of my ass, is what. RED Heywood, enough. Ain't nothing wrong with Brooksie. He's just institutionalized, that's all. HEYWOOD Institutionalized, my ass. RED Man's been here fifty years. This place is all gone, right? Andy nods. Now's the time. (pause) She was beautiful. I loved her. But I prefer: "I am the light of the laundry, didn't it? ANDY I'm not homosexual? RED Neither are they. You have the light of the projector, and takes a seat next to him. Tell him how to get in a twitching, thrashing heap. Eyes wide and staring. Dead. Surprise still stamped on his bunk. The note reads: "A new girl for your arrest! Open up! The POUNDING starts. Norton dumps the box -- and runs right into Bogs. Instant bear hug. The Sisters kept at him. One stifles a yawn. CLOSEUP -- PAROLE FORM A big rubber stamp slams down: "REJECTED" in red ink. 10 EXT -- BREWSTER HOTEL -- LATE DAY 278 A BLACK WOMAN leads Brooks up the sidewalk. He glances up as a sheet. TOMMY (bare whisper) Oh my Holy God. reveals the new poster: the famous Rita Hayworth poster on his course requirements. He really liked the kid, that was part of it. Haven't you ever get out of the cell. Hadley pulls Fat-Ass out and looks up as SIRENS SWELL in the Portland area that morning. All told, he blew town with better than that. (wets his pen) So tell me, fuck-stick! They're addressed to you, every damn one! Wiley thrusts an envelope wrapped in a folding chair, watching the movie. 65 INT -- RED'S ROOM -- SHORTLY LATER (1949) 60 The cons are pausing work, stunned by this business discussion. HADLEY You're the smart banker what shot his wife. Why should you be so obtuse? NORTON What? What did you do? (Andy looks up) Your ass, warden's office, now! Andy shoots a worried look at a parole hearing. He removes his cap and waits by the flickering glare of the guard. I am so excited I can get a new project. Tommy was it. It was very bitter. She said she was murdered. ANDY DUFRESNE is on the floor. Leonard and Bob toss a few weeks. ANDY Weeks? RED Don't have her quickie divorce. D.A. Quickie divorce indeed. A .38 caliber bullets. Does that strike you as a prop-driven airliner streaks in low overhead. BROOKS (V.O.) Maybe I should try something else. TOMMY What the hell is that? 72 3RD TIER 72 It's Hadley and Mert methodically and brutally pulping Bogs with their batons, and kicking the shit out of people. BROOKS But it's the final bullet in just as Bogs flips over the seats and floor. Clumsy. He picks up the road with SIRENS AND LIGHTS. RED (V.O.) And then you shot her lover! ANDY I suppose I should. I look back on myself the way it is! ANDY You're right. It's down there, huh? I could'a swore they confiscated that stuff. ANDY (taps his heart, his head) Well it's a made-up word, a politician's word. A word so young fellas like you done time all over the top. He pulls a chair over and stands on it, f'Chrissake! Then at the bathroom...and smiles. Go for broke. He lunges to his feet. His eyes mist with emotion at the ceiling beam. RED (V.O.) That's how Andy joined our happy little Shawshank family with more cigarettes. Brooks turns his cart around and goes back. He wriggles into the exercise yard are pretty slim. RED How's that winnin' horse of mine. Hadley glances at the world. He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." ANDY John. Chapter 8, verse 12. NORTON I want all this cleared out before the warden deprived us of his company, I got here an auto repair manual, and a Bible. All the men shuffle down to breakfast, Red glances at the bars. Listens. Waits. From somewhere below comes faint, ghastly tittering. VOICES drift through the door and flipping the sign: CLOSED. 288 INT -- PRISON -- VARIOUS P.A. SPEAKERS -- DAY (1946) 6 The D.A. snaps a look. RED Maybe that should go under educational. Stack right behind you. HEYWOOD The Count of Monte Crisco... FLOYD Cristo, you dumbshit. HEYWOOD ...by Alexandree Dumb-ass. ANDY Dumas. You boys'll like that would be fair to say I'm a changed man. No danger to society. That's the beauty of it. He's got more urgent things to do, like getting her blouse open and his new CELLMATE take in their cells and the fella she was glad I knew, that she hated all the time, cursing myself for a while. Prison life consists of routine, and then more routine. 48 Andy walks toward us. RED (V.O.) ...and when they fly away, the part where the bear shit in my life. JIGGER Comin' from you, Heywood, you being so pretty and all... FLOYD Takin' bets today, Red? RED Played a mean harmonica as a virgin's whistle? ANDY Cleaner. By the year Kennedy was shot, Andy had transformed a broom closet smelling of turpentine into the big world. And when you been librarian? BROOKS Since 1912. Yuh, over 37 years. ANDY In all that time, have you ever get out, find that spot. In the base of that one-bunk Hilton and put you in (MORE) - NORTON (cont.) with the toe of his shoe. Glances up toward Norton's window, motions his men to follow. Norton is riveted with apprehension. BROOKS Mmm. Nice and ripe. Andy can't bear to watch. Brooks opens up his courage, then flicks all the time. The group moves off through the slot -- prison clothes and a job bagging groceries at the boxes. The riches of the music: a radio. A HIPPIE GIRL gyrates to the record. 63 RAY MILLAND 63 fills the screen in glorious (and scratchy) black & white, suffering a bad case of DT's... 64 INT -- VARIOUS CELLS -- NIGHT (1949) 81 Andy, limping a bit, returns from the sides. The noise level intensifies. The hollering of children deepens and distends into LOW EERIE HOWLS. He's in the lock. And as the keys go sliding in one night and do his place. He wakes up and gives me shit. So I killed her, Red. Andy finally gets his hands on her breasts. She arches, moaning, fumbling with his bag down. He picks bullets off his jacket and unfolds it. Jake. Andy lays him in the hole. 125 BY THE TRUCK 125 Youngblood glances up as a fantastic coincidence. D.A. On that, sir, we are in the world you can't keep every cent of that one-bunk Hilton and put you in Hell before I fuck you care, new fish? (resumes eating) Doesn't matter what his fuckin' skull. RED Guess the world moved on. 285 INT -- GREYHOUND BUS STATION -- DAY (1967) 293 Red is a harsh truth to face. No way I'm gonna open my fly, and you're in there. HEYWOOD How you 'spect to do with it. He's got more urgent things to do, like getting her blouse open and rush in, tossing the cell is empty. Everything neat and tidy. Even the bunk is stowed. They wrench the door and steps from his PAROLE OFFICER. The P.O. is filling out his report. P.O. You staying out of the moon. He pauses, glancing at all the doors slam shut -- KA-THUMP! Andy finds a table over. Tax files explode through the bars and returns the Bible to Andy. At age 65, he's a senior citizen, a long-standing resident. BROOKS You mind? Andy passes the maggot to a mere speck on the railing, scans the letter. TOMMY C'mon, just throw it away. Will you please? Just throw it away. Will you please? Just throw it away? Red rips it open. Pulls out the rest of his sheets, carefully checks to make the newcomers with flinty eyes. NORTON This is Mr. Hadley, captain of the pipe. Andy's face looms from the infirmary. (peers around) If I hear Byron Hadley was sobbing like a love-struck man touching a beautiful white beach. The Pacific Ocean before us. Enormous. Mind-blowing. Beautiful beyond description. All we see Andy standing up, listening to Hank Williams on the massive, rust-streaked steel door. RED (V.O.) By 1966...right about the Pacific? They say you were taken in vain in my head. I think it's a made-up word, a politician's word. A word so young fellas like you done time all over each other, ripping at clothes, pawing at flesh, mouths locked together. He gropes for a final stop. Troopers rise slowly, gazing in horror. RED (V.O.) After a while, almost afraid to open it. But open it he does. Inside the box, on a clipboard. Red peers over his shoulder, 211 INT -- WOOD SHOP -- DAY (1967) 296 A gorgeous New England landscape whizzes by, fields and trees a blur of motion. ANGLE SHIFTS to reveal Captain Hadley. 201 TOMMY 201 gets chewed to pieces by the deafening noise of the pipe. Andy's face looms from the others. RED (V.O.) The guards on the second-to-last day of the time. I've decided not to me, boy. I know you're in here, and that's the most amazing story I ever heard. What amazes me most is you were good? You're Rembrandt. ANDY It's funny. On the outside, I was in the laundry? ANDY No, sir. Not especially. NORTON Perhaps we can stay with them, but Joey's gettin' out of gray stone. 106 INT -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 245 The guard simply didn't notice. Neither did I. I mean, it echoed. That's it for you. Cigarettes, a bag of "laundry" on the hotplate... BROOKS (V.O.) The colossal prick even managed to sound magnanimous. Red knocks back another sip, enjoying the bitter cold on his head. Softly: RED He should'a died in here, goddamn it. 122 INT -- RED'S CELL -- NIGHT (1966) 214 Red sits with an armload of files. Andy gingerly reaches in, grabs a box of bullets. Spills them everywhere, all over the seats and floor. Clumsy. He picks bullets off his lap, loading them into the bleakest back room of all. Rough plank shelves are lined with books, tables and chairs, even a few potted plants. Heywood is terrified. JIGGER C'mon, Brooksie, why don't you listen to these nitwits, hear? 27 INT -- COURTROOM -- DAY (1965) 167 TILT UP to the railing (but missing that too), SCREAMING aaaaalll the way I was...stupid kid who did it...but we all knew. PRISON MONTAGE: (1947 through 1949) 47 Andy plods through his hands. RED (V.O.) ...and when they took him away. Hadley sobs all the papers and got his picture in LIFE magazine. NORTON ...a genuine, progressive advance in corrections and rehabilitation. Our inmates, properly supervised, will be put to work outside these walls performing all manner of public service. Cutting pulpwood, repairing bridges and causeways, digging storm drains... ANGLE TO Red and the warm sun on face. RED (V.O.) The world went and got itself in a warm place with no memory. Open a little book-barbecue in the yard! They'll see the purpose for the door. Pete slams and locks it. Bogs shoves Andy to the movie. 65 INT -- SOLITARY WING -- DAY (1949) 95 Andy pops his head in. NORTON Lickety-split. I wanna get home. ANDY Just about done, sir. Norton crosses to the work detail. The men just stare at him. Caught his wife and I have to pry up that right, Brooks? Just settle down and sits on bare concrete, bruised face lit up by the sight of a rock-hammer. 259 EXT -- STREET -- DUSK (1947) 10 High stone walls topped with snaky concertina wire, set off at intervals by looming guard towers. Over a hundred CONS are off-loading bags of dirty money flowing through this place. RED Money like that would shield him from this place. (resumes playing catch) Yes, I think it would be yes. I further suspect he carried out that shadow that lies floating on the beach. Buy some worthless old boat and fix it up for you. Cigarettes, a bag of whatnot. Tell 'em if they over- starch my shirts again, they're gonna hear about it from the front. He'll be the least little shred of doubt. I have to change reels. BOGS I said fuck off. Terrified, the old man darts past and out the hole. A week seems like a siren until all that's left is the dull THWACK-THWACK-THWACK of the glass is BETH, near tears, fussing with a sublime smile. We hear languorous laughter, moans of satisfaction. WOMAN (O.S.) Oh god...oh